[2]
In 1977 and 1978, the defendant was an authorized dealer under an "Authorized Agricultural Dealer Agreement", of agricultural equipment and machines for John Deere Limited. During the years in question, the relationship between the defendant company and John Deere Limited was governed by an Agricultural Dealer Agreement, which was executed by the parties on an annual basis. The relevant provisions of that agreement are:
"8. DEALER'S DUTY TO STORE AND CARE FOR CONSIGNED GOODS. The Company retains title to Consigned Goods and the Dealer will hold them as the property of the Company unless and until they are sold or leased by him on behalf of the Company under the authority set out in s. 9. Dealer will keep Consigned Goods properly warehoused and protected and will not permit removal of any part from any item of Consigned Goods. He is responsible for all loss, damage or deterioration to Consigned Goods after delivery to him. The Company will arrange for physical damage insurance on Consigned Goods against perils listed in a certificate of insurance to be supplied to the Dealer. The Cost of such coverage will be charged to the Dealer and the Dealer agrees to pay the same. The Dealer will promptly pay to the Company the full amount of any loss, damage or deterioration in Consigned Goods, however caused, which is not covered by the foregoing insurance.
"The Dealer will pay when due all charges for customs duties, sales, use, excise, personal property, or other similar taxes and penalties, license fees and other charges of any kind that may be assessed or charged on the Goods, the sale, lease, or use thereof, or the Dealer's premises. If the Dealer fails to pay such charges, the Company may pay them and the Dealer agrees to reimburse the Company on demand for all moneys so paid out, with interest at the highest contract rate permitted by law but not in excess of 14% per annum.
"At the request of the Company, the Dealer will ship any item or items of Consigned Goods requested by the Company to the destination and in the manner directed by the Company, F.O.B. the Dealer's town.
"10. CARRY-OVER DEPOSIT. The Company publishes a Schedule of Selling Periods for Consigned Goods. This Schedule provides an 'Original Selling Period' for each class of machine, applicable to all of the machines of that class shipped to the Dealer during each 'shipping period' into which the year is divided. In the case of most classes of machines, the Schedule also provides an 'Extended Selling Period' applicable to a stated percentage of machines of like kind in each particular class shipped during the shipping period, should they still be in the Dealer's possession unsold at the end of the Original Selling Period.
"If the Dealer has failed to sell during the Original Selling Period any machine which is not eligible for the Extended Selling Period, he agrees, as security for the discharge of his obligations hereunder, to pay to the Company in cash a carryover deposit of 25% of the wholesale price as of that date. A 25% carry-over deposit will be paid on the remaining machines shipped during the shipping period if they remain unsold at the end of the Extended Selling Period. Dealer will also pay an additional carry-over deposit on the last day of each succeeding twelve month period after carry-over deposit first became payable on any machine, so long as it remains on hand unsold, in the amount of 25% of the wholesale price of the machine. After the third 25% deposit has been made the annual payment shall be 25% of the difference between the wholesale price of the machine and the sum of carryover deposits made previously for that machine.
"The Company may designate certain machines shipped as being available for immediate retail sale only. The Company may from time to time designate a higher carry-over deposit and shorter Original Selling Period on such machines.
"If the Dealer sells a machine on which there has been made a carryover deposit, or on which a charge for loss, damage or deterioration has been paid, the proceeds or cash remitted by him under s. 9 shall equal the appropriate wholesale price less any such deposit and less any such payment, and in the event of loss or damage to the Goods his liability to the Company under s. 8 is limited to the appropriate wholesale price less any such deposit or payment. If Consigned Goods are returned to the Company pursuant to the terms of this Agreement, the Dealer will be credited with any carry-over deposit he has paid on the Goods returned, but not with amounts paid for damage or deterioration.
"13. TITLE TO SOLD GOODS. Title to, ownership and the right to possession of all Sold Goods shipped by the Company to the Dealer is and shall remain vested in the Company until full payment of the indebtedness therefor and any other indebtedness now or hereafter owing by the Dealer to the Company shall have been made to the Company. Sales for value received may be made to users by the Dealer in the ordinary course of retail business. If one of the events enumerated in subsections (c) through (j) of s. 3 above shall occur, the Company may, at its option:
(a) Declare immediately due and payable all indebtedness owing by the Dealer to the Company and collect the same together with court costs and reasonable attorney's fees;
(b) Discontinue or withhold delivery of Sold Goods to the Dealer or make further deliveries only on a cash or C.O.D. basis;
(c) Take possession, with or without legal process, of any Sold Goods the title to which is in the Company.
"Notice of acceleration of the maturity of the Dealer's indebtedness shall be given to the Dealer in such manner and at such time as the Company may see fit. No notice of any other action taken or to be taken by the Company hereunder shall be necessary, such notice being specifically waived by the Dealer.
"After taking possession, the Company may resell all or any part of the Sold Goods at one or more public and/or private sales without notice or without demand for performance, at any which sale or sales the Company may purchase all or any part of the property sold. Proceeds of the sale of Sold Goods shall be applied first to the expenses of retaking, holding and preparing for sale, selling and the like, including reasonable attorney's fees and legal expense and, second, to the Dealer's indebtedness to the Company. If after such application there are excess proceeds, the Company will pay them over as provided by law. If there is a deficiency after application of such proceeds, the Dealer shall be liable for it and shall pay it forthwith. At its option, the Company may accept all or part of the items in full satisfaction of the dealer's remaining indebtedness, rather than reselling them as outlined above.
"18. SHIPMENT. Shipment of Goods will be governed by the following provisions:
...
(d) Delivery to Dealer; Risk of Loss. Delivery of Goods by the Company to a carrier, including agents or employees of the Dealer as well as common and contract carriers, shall constitute delivery to the Dealer, and the Dealer shall bear all risk of damage or loss thereafter."
The Agreement refers to two types of goods, sold and consigned. Sold goods are valued at under $1,000.00 and it is not disputed that the taxpayer is entitled to the inventory allowance for them. The dispute concerns the tax status of the remaining machines and attachments with a value in excess of $1,000.00, which the Agreement refers to as "Consigned Goods".