[10]
The result of all of this is that both parties acted in a manner at least as consistent with the concept of owership in the distributor as in the parent company. Of far greater significance to me is that the legislation does not contain any reference to ownership, title or purchase of the inventory, only that it be a part of the taxpayer's stock-in-trade. At first reading I also assumed that if the taxpayer were to overcome the ownership hurdle, it could not meet the issue of "cost". Evidence in this case clearly substantiates that there was no obligation upon this defendant to pay for any merchandise at the time of acquisition with the possible exception of certain items which became subject to a 25% carry-over deposit. How could this taxpayer be entitled to a percentage of a non-existent cost? The legislation, however, also contains its own definition; s. 248(1) defines "cost amount" as follows:
"248.(1) In this Act,
...
'cost amount' to a taxpayer of any property at any time means, except as expressly otherwise provided in this Act,
(c) where the property was property described in an inventory of the taxpayer, its value at that time as determined for the purpose of computing his income,"
Cost is therefore specifically defined not in terms of price but in terms of value at the time of acquisition. Surely, had Parliament intended to confine the allowance in s. 20(1)(gg) to the cost of merchandise bought and paid for, it could not unintentionally have overlooked these two opportunities to so state, the first by defining ownership in plain legal terms, the second by defining cost in terms of purchase price at the time of acquisition. I have every reason therefore to concur with the analysis of the learned member of the Tax Review Board who concluded his Reasons for Judgment as follows:
"Nevertheless, the Agreement read as a whole certainly changed the true meaning of the simple words 'On Consignment'. Once John Deere had placed the shipment ordered by the appellant onto the flat deck of the motor carrier, for delivery to the yard of the appellant, risk, at that point in time, fell upon the appellant. Paragraph 8 of the John Deere Agreement clearly sets out the risks and responsibilities involved and falling upon the appellant. The appellant certainly had possession once it took delivery and cleared up any insurance matters relating to damage in transit. Once deliveries were accepted at the appellant's yard, it was obliged, pursuant to the major Agreement, to make payments therefor at specified times. It could not return the goods to John Deere. It could only sell retail, or transfer to another dealer or lease subject to the terms set out by John Deere. In that responsibility fell upon the appellant from the time of delivery, it recorded on its card system every item down to the smallest part as a liability item until it was sold and then it would be taken out of inventory.
"John Deere equipment, parts and attachments delivered to the appellant were its stock-in-trade in the same manner as a real estate agent acquiring an inventory of buildings purchased under an Agreement for Sale for the purpose of reselling at a profit. I can see no difference with respect to the question of title upon which Mr. Erlichman rested his case than from that of a real estate agent dealing in such a manner. The holding of the legal title to the equipment by John Deere as security did not affect the true issue anymore than the taking of security on all equipment, parts and attachments in the form of a chattel mortgage which could have been done.
"Referring to the words of Cattanach, J., in Minister of National Revenue v. Wardean Drilling Limited, 69 D.T. C. 5194; [1969] C.T.C. 265, at pages 5197 and 270 respectively, he says:
'In my opinion the proper test as to when property is acquired must relate to the title to the property in question or to the normal incidents of title, either actual or constructive, such as possession, use and risk.'
"In summary, all the characteristics of ownership fell upon the appellant once delivery was made to it in that the goods were entirely at its risk, they were in its possession and its use of same related to the sale, leasing or transferring to another dealer. This was its business. This constituted its use of the goods. Further, it should be clearly understood, from the evidence given by Mr. Northcott, and I found him completely honest and forthright, and obviously so did Mr. Erlichman because he did not deign to cross-examine him, that the goods, once delivered to the appellant, could not be returned to John Deere and that it had to make instalment payments thereon and ultimately pay out the full price after a certain period of time, regardless of whether it had sold or transferred the items in its possession. All machinery, parts and attachments were treated as stock-in-trade and were sold and recorded (and I may add very accurately) by his accountants.
"I think the appellant company has dealt with an onerous contract with John Deere in a very straight forward, honest and efficient manner and the evidence relating thereto was clear and uncontradicted. I therefore allow the appeal and refer the matter back to the respondent for reconsideration and reassessment."