[64]
On December 5, 1996, an Order-in-Council was made under the
Public Service Rearrangement and Transfer of Duties Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-34, transferring from the Commission to the Tribunal Panel the control and supervision of the Tribunal Panel Registry. [see footnote 2] Orders-in-Council were also made amending the Schedules of the
Financial Administration Act
, the
Access to Information Act
, the
Privacy Act
, the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
, and the
Public Sector Compensation Act
to include the Tribunal Panel. [see footnote 3] The Regulatory Impact Analysis Statement which was drafted by Mr. Glynn and which accompanied the Orders-in-Council stated as follows: [see footnote 4]
"REGULATORY IMPACT
ANALYSIS STATEMENT
(This statement is not part of the orders.)
Description
The Orders-in-Council address the necessary administrative re-organization to effect the transfer of the Human Rights Tribunal Registry from the [Commission] by creating the [Tribunal Panel] as a separate department as defined in s. 2(1) of the
Public Service Employment Act
.
The
Canadian Human Rights Act
was amended in 1985 to create a separate Tribunal. The [Tribunal Panel] and the [Commission] are part of one program namely the Canadian Human Rights Program. The Tribunal's Registry, however, has remained a part of the Commission even though it has operated independently on day-to-day matters. The Registry is funded as part of the Commission and reports to the Commission's Secretary General and ultimately to the Chief Commissioner.
Alternatives
The only other possible alternative to achieve the end objective is an amendment to the
Canadian Human Rights Act
. It does not appear that the government will make the necessary amendments in the foreseeable future.
Benefits and Costs
The potential social impact will be positive. Separation of the Tribunal and the Commission is required for several reasons. First, from a policy perspective, it is inappropriate for the Commission to be involved in any decision making process and fiscal operation of the Tribunal, since the Commission represents the public interest and generally the same interest of the complainant before the Tribunal. The Commission is a party of equal status to the complainant and the respondent. The rules of natural justice demand that the Commission not appear to have special status or influence before the Tribunal. Secondly, respondents have alleged that they are unable to receive a fair hearing before a Tribunal within the meaning of the
Charter
. This allegation is based on the belief that the Tribunal and the Commission are too closely aligned and are in fact one organization. These allegations have caused delays in Tribunal proceedings.
The separation of the two organizations will give the Tribunal its own Vote (appropriation of funds) and the necessary independence. Simultaneously, it will relieve the Commission of its responsibilities and reporting commitments on the Tribunal's activities.
The economic impact will be minimal. There will be no additional costs. All financial authorities for the Registry operations are currently in [Commission] reference levels and will be transferred under the control of the [Tribunal Panel].
The Tribunal will obtain corporate services from an independent federal government agency within the Justice portfolio.
. . . . .
Compliance and Enforcement
Without these changes, the operational independence and authority of the Tribunal to fulfill its mandate as established by Parliament could be at risk."