[85]
In his reasons, Lamer, C.J., described the characteristics inherent in the concepts of judicial independence and impartiality in the following terms, at page 139:
"As this court stated in
MacKeigan v. Hickman
, [1989] 2 S.C.R. 796, at p. 826, judicial independence is an
underlying
condition which
contributes
to the guarantee of an impartial hearing:
'It should be noted that the independence of the judiciary must not be confused with impartiality of the judiciary. As Le Dain, J., points out in
R. v. Valente
, impartiality relates to the mental state possessed by a judge; judicial independence, in contrast, denotes the underlying relationship between the judiciary and other branches of government which serves to ensure that the court will function and be perceived to function impartially. Thus the question in a case such as this is not whether the government action in question would in fact affect a judge's impartiality, but rather whether it threatens the independence which is the underlying condition of judicial impartiality in the particular case.'
"The overall objective of guaranteeing judicial independence is to ensure a reasonable perception of impartiality; judicial independence is but a 'means' to this 'end'. If judges could be perceived as 'impartial' without judicial 'independence', the requirement of 'independence' would be unnecessary. However, judicial independence is critical to the public's perception of impartiality. Independence is the cornerstone, a necessary prerequisite, for judicial impartiality.
"However, the facts of this case make it clear that in some situations, judicial independence may not be sufficient. Judicial independence is only one component of judicial impartiality:
"[A] lack of independence could be considered a good indicator of a lack of impartiality. However, a lack of impartiality taken alone does not necessarily mean a lack of independence. The absence of impartiality could be caused by a number of factors, of which lack of independence is only one."