[121]
Following his consideration of the origins and nature of judicial independence, Lamer, C.J., reviewed and expanded on certain aspects of the decision in
R. v.
Valente
, supra. In particular, he discussed "... the three core characteristics of judicial independence, and ... the two dimensions of judicial independence" outlined by Le Dain, J., In
R. v. Valente
, supra (page 80). At pages 81-82, he stated as follows:
"[118] The three core
characteristics
of judicial independence --- security of tenure, financial security, and administrative independence -- should be contrasted with what I have termed the two dimensions of judicial independence. In
Valente
, Le Dain, J., drew a distinction between two dimensions of judicial independence, the
individual independence
of a judge and the
institutional or collective independence
of the court or tribunal of which that judge is a member. In other words, while individual independence attaches to individual judges, institutional or collective independence attaches to the court or tribunal as an institutional entity. The two different dimensions of judicial independence are related in the following way (
Valente
, supra, at p. 687):
'The relationship between these two aspects of judicial independence is that an individual judge may enjoy the essential conditions of judicial independence but if the court or tribunal over which he or she presides is not independent of the other branches of government, in what is essential to its function, he or she cannot be said to be an independent tribunal.'
"[119] It is necessary to explain the relationship between the three core characteristics and the two dimensions of judicial independence, because Le Dain, J., did not fully do so in
Valente
. For example, he stated that security of tenure was part of the individual independence of a court or tribunal, whereas administrative independence was identified with institutional or collective independence. However, the core characteristics of judicial independence, and the dimensions of judicial independence, are two different concepts. The core characteristics of judicial independence are distinct facets of the definition of judicial independence. Security of tenure, financial security, and administrative independence come together to constitute judicial independence. By contrast, the dimensions of judicial independence indicate which entity -- the individual judge or the court or tribunal to which he or she belongs -- is protected by a particular code characteristics.
"[120] The conceptual distinction between the core characteristics and the dimensions of judicial independence suggests that it may be possible for a core characteristics to have
both
an individual
and
an institutional or collective dimension. To be sure, sometimes a core characteristic only attaches to a particular dimension of judicial independence; administrative independence, for example, only attaches to the court as an institution (although sometimes it may be exercised on behalf of a court by its chief judge or justice). However, this need not always be the case."