[124]
In order to guarantee objectively the institutional financial security of the provincial courts and to prevent "... political interference through economic manipulation ...", Lamer, C.J., placed an independent judicial compensation commission between the judiciary and the other branches of government (page 102). He further stated unequivocally that salary negotiations between the judiciary and the government are constitutionally inappropriate, not only because such negotiations are political in nature, but also because they place the judiciary in the position of negotiating with a litigant. In relation to the latter point, Lamer, C.J., stated as follows, at pages 112-113:
"[187] Second, negotiations are deeply problematic because the Crown is almost always a party to criminal prosecutions in provincial courts. Negotiations by the judges who try those cases put them in a conflict of interest, because they would be negotiating with a litigant. The appearance of independence would be lost, because salary negotiations bring with them a whole set of expectations about the behaviour of the parties to those negotiations which are inimical to judicial independence. The major expectation is of give and take between the parties. By analogy with
Généreux
, the reasonable person might conclude that judges would alter the manner in which they adjudicate cases in order to curry favour with the executive. A professor Friedland has written in
A Place Apart: Judicial Independence and Accountability in Canada
(Ottawa: Canadian Judicial Council, 1995), at p. 57, 'head-to-head bargaining between the government and the judiciary [creates] ... the danger of subtle accommodations being made'. This perception would be heightened if the salary negotiations, as is usually the case, were conducted behind closed doors, beyond the gaze of public scrutiny, and through it, public accountability. Conversely, there is the expectation that parties to a salary negotiation often engage in pressure tactics. As such, the reasonable person might expect that judges would adjudicate in such a manner so as to exert pressure on the Crown."