[131]
With respect to the jurisdiction of a Tribunal appointed under the
Act
, La Forest, J., confirmed that a Tribunal or Review Tribunal also lacked jurisdiction to declare unconstitutional a limiting provision of the
Act
(pages 895-896). However, he concluded that "... a tribunal may have jurisdiction to consider general legal and constitutional questions" (pages 897-898). In that regard, he stated as follows, at pages 896-897:
"As with the Commission there is no explicit power given to a tribunal to consider questions of law. Taken together, ss. 50(1) and 53(2) of the
Act
state that a tribunal shall inquire into the complaint referred to it by the Commission to determine if it is substantiated. This is primarily and essentially a fact-finding inquiry with the aim of establishing whether or not a discriminatory practice occurred. In the course of such an inquiry a tribunal may indeed consider questions of law. As with the Commission, these questions will often centre around the interpretation of the enabling legislation. However, unlike the Commission, it is implicit in the scheme of the
Act
that a tribunal possess a more general power to deal with questions of law. Thus tribunals have been recognized as having jurisdiction to interpret statutes other than the
Act
(see
Canada (Attorney General) v. Druken
, [1989] 2 F.C. 24 (C.A.)) and as having jurisdiction to consider constitutional questions other than those noted above. In particular, it is well accepted that a tribunal has the power to address questions on the constitutional division of powers (
Public Service Alliance of Canada v. Qu'Appelle Indian Residential Council
(1986), 7 C.H.R.R. D/3600 (C.H.R.T.)), on the validity of a ground of discrimination under the
Act
(
Nealy v. Johnston
(1989), 10 C.H.R.R. D/6450 (C.H.R.T.)), and it is foreseeable that a tribunal could entertain
Charter
arguments on the constitutionality of available remedies in a particular case (see
Canada (Human Rights Commission) v. Taylor
, [1990] 3 S.C.R. 892). Even in such instances, however, the legal findings of a tribunal receive no deference from the courts. This position was firmly established by this court in
Mossop
, supra, at p. 585:
"The superior expertise of a human rights tribunal relates to fact-finding and adjudication in a human rights context. It does not extend to general questions of law such as the one at issue in this case. These are ultimately matters within the province of the judiciary, and involve concepts of statutory interpretation and general legal reasoning which the courts must be supposed competent to perform."