[22]
The following provisions are found in the Membership Code:
"5.1 Persons made eligible to apply for membership under the
Indian Act
as amended on April 17, 1985
(a) The following person who lost membership and Indian Status prior to April 17, 1985, are entitled for membership in the Band upon acquiring Indian Status pursuant to s. 6(1)(c) of the
Indian Act
:
(i) women who married a person who was not Indian;
(ii) persons born of a marriage entered into after the 4th day of September 1951, and who had attained the age of twenty one years, whose mother and whose father's mother were not status Indians;
(iii) illegitimate child of a female Indian Band member whose names were struck from the Band Membership list by Indian Affairs;
(iv) persons who were non-voluntarily enfranchised.
(b) The above persons are automatically entitled to have their names entered on the Swan River Indian Band Membership List, maintained by the Band, upon submitting to the Band Council an application with satisfactory written proof that their names have been re-entered on the Indian Registry pursuant to s. 6(1)(c).
(c) Membership granted to the above persons is not subject to appeal.
. . . . .
"7.1 All applications for membership in the Band shall be submitted by the applicant or the Band member parent of the infant applicant in writing to the Band Council with all necessary documentation and proof required to establish the eligibility of the applicant.
"7.2 Within ninety (90) days of receipt of completed applications, they shall be reviewed by the Band Council.
"7.3 Upon reviewing the application for the persons eligible under s. 4.1, s. 5.1, s. 5.2(a) and s. 5.2(b) and determining all necessary proof has been provided, the Band Council shall place their names on the Membership List. This decision is not subject to appeal.
"7.4 Upon reviewing the application for persons eligible under s. 5.2(c); 5.3; 5.4; and 5.5 and determining that;
(a) the applicant is duly eligible for membership;
(b) their submission to membership will not be harmful and not adversely affect the interests of the Band;
(c) the applicant intends to respect the traditions and customs of the Band:
"The Band Council shall either approve or reject the application.
"7.5 In the event that the application is approved, the applicant's name be entered on the Band list subject to no appeal of their decision within thirty (30) days
"7.6 In the event the application is rejected, the applicant shall be immediately notified in writing of the decision and the reason therefore within ten (10) days.
"8. Appeals
"8.1 A member of the Band, or the applicant, may appeal the decision of the Band Council regarding the approval or rejection of an application pursuant to s. 7.4.
"8.2 The appeal and the reasons therefore shall be made by signed letter to the Band Council within thirty (30) days of the decision of the Council.
"8.3 Within six (6) months of the appeal, the Band Council will hold a Membership Vote to determine whether the applicant shall be added to the Membership List.
"8.4 The Band Council shall appoint [an] Electoral Officer who shall be responsible for conducting the Membership Vote including posting notices, arranging for polling stations and ballots, supervising voting, counting votes and posting results.
"8.5 The electors shall be given thirty (30) days' notice of the Membership Vote. The notice shall be publicly posted on the Reserves stating the time place and date of the Band Membership Vote. A list of eligible electors shall be attached. The list of persons whose applications have been appealed, with [an] indication of their approval or rejection by the Band Council, shall also be posted with the notice.
"8.6 The Membership Vote shall be conducted by secret ballot. The ballot shall read as follows:
'Do you approve the following persons being admitted to the membership of the Swan River Indian Band?'
"This question shall be followed by a listing of the names of applicants and opposite their name [a] box marked YES or NO.
"8.7 Those name[s] receiving approval of a majority [of] the electors of the Band shall have their names added to the Band Membership List.
"The Regulations contain the following relevant provisions:
"7.2 Requirement to Register
"Any Elector not registered to a Family Group on the List of Electors must notify the Electoral Officer at least twenty-one (21) days prior to the date set for the Election of Councillors as to Family Group with which they wish to be registered. Within twenty-four (24) hours of receiving such notification, the Electoral Officer must update the List of Electors including those attached to the Notices of Nomination.
"7.3 Request to Amend List of Electors
"If any Elector does not agree with the registration of an Elector to a particular Family Group they may, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for the Election or By-election for Councillors, submit a written request to the Electoral Officer to have the list of Electors amended.
. . . . .
"12.1 Grounds for Appeal of Election of Councillors
"Within five (5) consecutive days of and including the Election Day, or in the event a Councillor elected by acclamation, within five (5) consecutive days of and including the day nominations close, any Elector within a Family Group may appeal the results of an Election, By-election or Run-off Election of a Councillor for their Family Group if, on reasonable probable grounds they believe:
a) An error was made in the interpretation or application of the Regulations materially and directly affecting the conduct and outcome of the Election, By-election or Run-off Election;
b) A Candidate did not meet the eligibility requirements set forth in 6.5;
c) A Candidate was guilty of promoting or aiding corrupt Election practices including, but not limited to, bribery, threats and intimidation of Candidates, Electors, the Electoral Officer or Polling Clerks;
d) A person voted who was not eligible to vote; or
e) Any other circumstance or event materially and directly affecting the conduct and outcome of the Election, By-election or Run-off Election.
. . . . .
"12.3 Notice of Appeal
a) An Appeal may be made by forwarding a Notice of Appeal in writing to the Electoral Officer outlining the grounds for the appeal together with a cash deposit of One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars.
b) The Notice of Appeal must be received by the Electoral Officer within five (5) days from the Election Day giving rise to the appeal.
"12.4 The Electoral Officer will:
a) In the case of an appeal with respect to an Election, By-election or Run-off Election for Councillors, forward the Notice of Appeal to all Candidates within the same Family Group as the appellant;
. . . . .
c) In either event, post a Notice of Appeal in public places on the Swan River Reserve and any other locations designated by the Council.
"12.5 Election Appeal Committee
a) The Election Appeal Committee for an Appeal of an Election, By-election or Run-off Election of a Councillor will consist of the Council excluding the individual in respect of which the appeal is brought
. . . . .
"12.6 Meeting of the Election Appeal Committee
"Subject to 12.7, within fourteen (14) days of receiving the Notice of Appeal, the Electoral Officer will convene a meeting of the Committee for the purpose of hearing the appeal. The meeting will be chaired by the Electoral Officer who will not be entitled to vote.
"12.7 Notice of the meeting must be posted in the same manner as the Notice of Appeal and delivered to the appellant at least three (3) days prior to the date set for the meeting.
"12.8 The appellant, the individual in respect of which the appeal is brought and other interested parties or their representatives may present oral or written submissions to the Committee at the meeting.
"12.9 Within five (5) days of the meeting, the Committee will promptly make one of the following decisions:
a) To deny the appeal on the basis the evidence presented did not fully and properly establish the necessary grounds for an appeal;
b) To uphold the grounds for an appeal but allow the results of the Election in question to stand as the infraction did not materially or directly affect the result of the Election; or
c) To uphold the appeal and call for:
i) a New Election, By-election or Run-off Election;
ii) a new Election, By-election or Run-off Election for only those offices materially and directly affected; or
iii) a Run-off Election.
"12.l0 Forthwith, the Electoral Officer shall notify affected parties of the decision.
. . . . .
"18.1 Approval by Council
"Any amendment(s) to the Regulations must first be approved by a quorum of the Council.
"18.2 Approval of Amendments by Electors
"Once approved by a quorum of Council, amendments must then be approved by a majority of the Electors from each of at least four (4) of the Family Groups signifying their approval in a Petition. The Petition must include a copy of the proposed amendments, each Electors name, their Family Group, whether they approve or disapprove of the proposed amendments, their signature and the date on which it was signed. Each Elector's signature must be witnessed by another individual who is at least eighteen (18) years of age."
THE DECISION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. The appeal of Gerald Giroux Junior