[34]
This Court has previously considered these factors in the context of the appeal process provided for in the
Regulations
in
Sound v. Swan River First Nation et al.
, [2004] 1 F.C.R. 336; 237 F.T.R. 74 (F.C.). There, my colleague Madam Justice Heneghan wrote at paragraphs of 47 through 52:
"47 When these factors are considered in the present case, I conclude that the duty of fairness was breached by the Committee. The applicant did not know the specific allegations made against him by Robert Sound, or the evidence submitted by Robert Sound to support such allegations. The notice of appeal letter provides only a brief glimpse of the allegations. In my opinion, this letter does not provide enough information about the alleged improprieties in election practices that would enable the applicant to know the exact nature of the evidence against him and the case to be met.
"48 First, the nature of the decision being made is regulatory and adversarial. The purpose of the appeal process and the Committee's decision is to discover improper conduct in elections and punish individuals accordingly, by stripping them of their elected official status. Another purpose is to protect the integrity of the election process established by the Swan River Nation. The Committee must decide, on the evidence presented, whether it could be fully and properly established that the applicant was guilty of corrupt election practices, pursuant to paragraph 12.1(c) of the
Regulations
.
"49 Second, the regulatory scheme governs all aspects of elections and the holding of elected office for the Swan River First Nation. The scheme is intended to reflect the customary election practices of the Swan River First Nation and was first adopted in 1993 after a community consultation process. The process to be followed in an appeal, as required by the
Regulations
, is through a hearing convened by the Committee. At the hearing, the appellant, the candidate whose election is being appealed and other interested parties are permitted to present oral or written submission to the Committee. A degree of openness and fairness is already inherent in this process by the provision of a hearing before the Committee.
"50 Third, the decision under review is one which can be expected to have a significant impact on the applicant's employment and financial stability. The cross-examination of Leon Chalifoux reveals that band councillors receive a monthly salary and expenses for travel. Perhaps more importantly, the impact of this decision is significant on the applicant's reputation in the community. Furthermore, the respondent, Robert Sound, also has an important stake in the Committee's decision as he apparently believes the allegations of corrupt election practice set out in his notice of appeal and desires to participate in a By-election for the position held by the applicant for the Sound family group.
"51 Fourth, it is not apparent that the applicant had a legitimate expectation that any particular procedure, beyond that expressly stated in the
Regulations
, was to be followed by the Committee. The applicant, as an elected Band councillor at the time, had sat on the Committee hearing of an appeal of a Mr. Dwain Davis. Mr. Davis had appealed against the 'whole election'. The fact that the applicant did not complain of the procedure followed in the Davis appeal is not a ground, in my opinion, to find that he should be precluded from now claiming that the principles of natural justice were denied during the hearing of Robert Sound's appeal against the applicant's own election.
"52 Fifth, the procedure chosen by the Committee itself in this case was that both the appellant and the candidate whose election was being appealed, as well as other interested parties, such as elders and members of Robert Sound's family, had a chance to present their submissions to the Committee, orally, without having an opportunity to hear the other side. Neither side was provided with written representations of the other side prior to the hearing. The applicant had been provided only with the brief notice of appeal filed by Robert Sound."