[64]
The Code states that membership applications are to be submitted in writing to the Band Council (section 7.1) which is the entity stated to be responsible for reviewing and approving or rejecting applications (sections 7.2, 7.3, and 7.4). As noted above, to the extent that the Membership Committee may provide recommendations to the Band Council it is relevant that at the material time Mr. Giroux was not a member of the Membership Committee. It is therefore significant that the Committee's reasons do not consider the following relevant facts and matters:
1. Given that Membership applications are required to be decided by the Band Council, apparently after it receives a recommendation from the Membership Committee, how was it that it was Mr. Giroux's personal responsibility to post the list of approved applications so that the failure to post the list was a corrupt election practice on Mr. Giroux's part?
2. The Code contains no obligation to post the list of approved new members.
3. While the practice of the Swan River First Nation was to post the names of new members for a period of 30 days (concurrent with the appeal period), the Swan River First Nation received a written legal opinion from its counsel, dated February 3, 2005, which advised that the pre-election grant of membership to 20 new members was valid, hence the new members were entitled to all of the benefits of Band membership.
4. The new Membership information was posted approximately 45 days after Council approved the applications on December 6, 2004. The Band Council Resolutions approving the applications were posted in or about the first week of January 2005. No appeals were brought with respect to any new membership.
5. No request was made to the electoral officer to amend the list of electors.
6. 20 new members were added to the Band, only three of which were added to the Giroux family group, while 17 others were added to other family groups. If the failure to post the list of new members vitiated their membership, how was it that the election of the other Band Councillors was not invalidated on the ground that persons voted who were not eligible to vote?