[31]
In Lyons Partnership, L.P. v. MacGregor (1999), 5 C.P.R.(4th) 158 this Court had an opportunity to consider some first principles relating to the appropriate penalty for contempt of court by breach of a court order. Those principles are:
[21] In Cutter (Canada) Ltd., supra, Urie J.A. said in assessing the amount of the fine what was relevant was "the gravity of the contempt in the context of the particular circumstances of the case as they pertain to the administration of justice" (page 562). The Federal Court of Appeal endorsed the reasons of the trial judge that the amount of the fine should reflect "the severity of the law and yet sufficiently moderate to show the temperance of justice" (p. 563). The level of the fine, Urie J.A. indicated, could not be a token fine because this would "be inconsistent with the gravity of the contraventions and might serve to encourage others to flout the law if it is to their financial advantage to do so" (pp. 567-68).
[22] This last statement by Urie J.A. echoes the words of Justice Rouleau of this Court in Montres Rolex S.A. v. Herson (1987),
15 C.P.R. (3d) 368
(F.C.T.D.), "that the primary purpose of imposing sanctions is to ensure compliance with orders of the court" (p. 371). Pinard J. of this Court in Louis Vuitton S.A. v. Tokyo-Do Enterprises Inc. (1991),
37 C.P.R. (3d) 8
(F.C.T.D.), also stressed the importance of deterrence as the principal factor in ensuring that those orders will not be breached again because "if those who get caught were to get away unscathed that would encourage such activities and consequently destroy the intended effect of the laws that have been passed" (page 13, line b). Pinard J., in assessing a fine, took into account the value of the counterfeit goods sold. He also ordered solicitor-client costs capped to a maximum.
[23] To close off on the issue of first principles, other relevant factors to be taken into account are whether the contempt offence is a first offence ®. v. de L'Isle (1994),
56 C.P.R. (3d) 371
(F.C.A.)), and the presence of any mitigating factors such as good faith or apology (Baxter Travenol Laboratories, supra).