[25]
One of the guiding principles of justiciability is that all of the branches of government must be sensitive to the separation of function within Canada's constitutional matrix so as not to inappropriately intrude into the spheres reserved to the other branches: see
Doucet-Boudreau et al. v. Nova Scotia (Minister of Education) et al.
, [2003] 3 S.C.R. 3; 312 N.R. 1; 218 N.S.R.(2d) 311; 687 A.P.R. 311; 2003 SCC 62, at paras. 33 to 36 and
Canadian Union of Public Employees et al. v. Canada (Minister of Health)
(2004), 261 F.T.R. 237; 244 D.L.R.(4th) 175; 2004 FC 1334, at para. 39 [F.C.]. Generally a court will not involve itself in the review of the actions or decisions of the executive or legislative branches where the subject matter of the dispute is either inappropriate for judicial involvement or where the court lacks the capacity to properly resolved it. These concerns are well expressed in
Boundaries of Judicial Review: The Law of Justiciability in Canada
, above, at pp. 4 and 5:
"Appropriateness not only includes both normative and positive elements, but also reflects an appreciation for both the capacities and legitimacy of judicial decision-making. Tom Cromwell (now Mr. Justice Cromwell of the Nova Scotia of Appeal) summarized this approach to justiciability in the following terms:
'The justiciability of a matter refers to its being suitable for determination by a court. Justiciability involves the subject matter of the question, the manner of its presentation and the appropriateness of judicial adjudication in light of these factors.
This appropriateness may be determined according to both institutional and constitutional standards. It includes both the question of the adequacy of judicial machinery for the task as well as the legitimacy of using it
.'
"While it is helpful to develop the criteria for a determination of justiciability, including factors such as institutional capacity and institutional legitimacy, it is necessary to leave the content of justiciability open-ended. We cannot state all the reasons why a matter may be non-justiciable. While justiciability will contain a diverse and shifting set of issues, in the final analysis, all one can assert with confidence is that there will always be, and always should be, a boundary between what courts should and should not decide, and further, that this boundary should correspond to predictable and coherent principles. As Galligan concludes, 'Non-justiciability means no more and no less than that a matter is unsuitable for adjudication.'" (Footnotes omitted.) (Emphasis in original.)