[5]
Profound internal division among the members of the Council, who are associated with two competing factions, has seriously impaired the functioning of the Council and has resulted in abundant and persistent litigation. The three applicant Chiefs were re-elected in 2001 while the three respondent Chiefs were newly elected in 2001. Chief Crawford Gabriel was also a newly elected Chief. Since the 2001 elections, the following applications have been brought before the court:
(a)
Ross v. Mohawk Council of Kanesatake
(File No. T-1915-01), to set aside the termination of the acting Chief of Police. In this case, the application was heard by the court, but no final order has been released as of the date of these reasons for order and order.
(b)
Gabriel v. Mohawk Council of Kanesatake
(File No. T-33-02), to set aside the removal of the applicant James Gabriel as Grand Chief, one of the re-elected chiefs. In that case, the newly elected chiefs put in practice their views that non- residents should not be allowed to vote at a Community meeting called on December 6, 2001, for the removal of Grand Chief James Gabriel. The court granted an interlocutory injunction and ordered his reinstatement pending the final disposition of this application (
Gabriel v. Mohawk Council of Kanesatake et al.
, [2002] F.T.R. Uned. 310; [2002] F.C.J. No. 635 (T.D.) ("
Gabriel
")). In her decision, Tremblay-Lamer, J., noted that the latter who first became Grand Chief in 1996, and was subsequently re-elected in 1998 and 2001, "strongly supported police initiatives to control criminal activities in the territories, particularly involving the illegal drug trade". However, she went on to state that: "[t]he 2001 elections saw four new members elected to Council. The new members did not share the applicant's views. Their focus was on public accountability, rather than police and security matters" (paragraphs 5 and 6).
(c)
Bonspille v. Mohawk Council of Kanesatake
(File No. T-824-02), to set aside the termination of two police commissioners. The court granted an interim injunction and ordered the reinstatement of Louise Bonspille and Brenda Etienne as members of the Kanesatake Mohawk Police Commission until such time as an interlocutory order is rendered in this matter (
Bonspille et al. v. Mohawk Council of Kanesatake et al.
, [2002] F.T.R. Uned. 463; [2002] F.C.J. No. 919 (T.D.)).
(d)
Bonspille v. Mohawk Council of Kanesatake
(File No. T-1150-02), to set aside an attempt by the Council to appoint new commissioners which has been allegedly made contrary to the Tripartite Agreement on Policing. No final order has been released in this matter.
(e)
Chéné v. Mohawk Council of Kanesatake
(File No. T-1884-02), to set aside the removal of Chief Chéné from the Council, also a re-elected chief. The court granted an interim injunction and ordered her reinstatement until such time as the motion for interlocutory injunction is heard by the court. An order was rendered on November 19, 2002.