[24]
As I understand it, this jurisprudential definition of custom has two components. The first involves "practices" which may either be "established" through repetitive acts in time, or through a single act such as the "adoption" of an electoral code. This was in fact noted in
Chingee et al. v. Chingee et al.
(1998), 153 F.T.R. 257 (T.D.) ("
McLeod
"), where Reed, J. (as he then was), described the nature of custom in paragraph 8 as a "practice established or adopted as a result of the individuals to whom it applies having accepted to be governed in accordance therewith". Further, she emphasized in paragraphs 10 and 17 the evolutionary nature of custom depending on changing circumstances:
"Also, custom by its nature is not frozen in time It can and does change in response to changed circumstances. A band may choose to depart from oral tradition and set down its custom in written form. It may move from a hereditary to an electoral system. It may choose to adopt as its customary practices, practices and procedures that resemble the election procedures used to elect municipal or provincial governments. I cannot interpret the reference to 'custom of the band' in s. 2(1) as preventing a band from changing the custom according to which it governs itself from time to time in response to changing circumstances.
. . . . .
"The defendants' main argument is that to allow amendment of the custom of the band by majority vote of the band members is to impose a non-customary method of selection. That is, that a determination of how the custom of the band may be changed or determined is itself a determination of the method of selection. That may be the inescapable consequence, but I return to what is fairly established in the jurisprudence, that the custom of the band is the practices for selecting the council of the band that are generally acceptable to members of the band, upon which there is broad consensus As noted above, I cannot conclude that band custom is frozen in time."