[29]
In
Lac des Mille Lacs First Nation et al. v. Chapman et al.
(1998), 149 F.T.R. 227 (T.D.) (the "
First Nation
"), discussions were apparently held in 1995 among the members of the First Nation and a new Custom Leadership Selection Code (the "Selection Code") was drafted along with Referendum Regulations and a draft Financial Administration Law. By referendum of the First Nation, the Selection Code was allegedly adopted by the First Nation. Counsel for the applicant submitted that, with only 73 votes validly cast, it was not possible to state that the Selection Code was adopted according to the criteria established in
Bigstone
, supra. Thus, the issue was whether the Selection Code was generally acceptable and whether it was supported by a broad consensus. Cullen, J. (as he then was), concluded as follows at paragraphs 29 and 34:
"The unique situation of the members of this First Nation must be considered in such a discussion.
According to paragraph 20 of the affidavit of Ron Bachmier there are approximately 300 members of this First Nation who are eligible to vote. However, the location of only approximately 130 of these members is known.
The applicant does not contest these figures. The minutes of the 1990 general meeting, at which a Chief and Councillors were elected, indicates that somewhere in the neighbourhood of 40 eligible voters participated. This is evidenced by the minutes of the 1990 General Meeting which show that 45 votes were cast in the election of Chief and 38 (114 / 3) in the voting for the Councillors. The minutes of the 1996 election (Exhibit 'E' to the affidavit of Roderick Sawdo) indicate that 45 voters were registered. There has been no other evidence presented on the issue of voter participation. There is a pattern of general non-participation even by known members who are eligible to vote.
I find that the participation of 86 voting members which resulted in 73 votes being counted, out of which 64 votes were in favour of the Selection Code and 7 were against with one 'no opinion' and one spoiled, constitutes a broad consensus sufficient in these special circumstances to consider the Selection Code to now constitute Band Custom.
. . . . .
"In the result, I find that the respondents Lawrence Chapman, Elizabeth Boucher, Ron Bachmier and James Nayanookee [sic] constitute the proper Chief and Council of the First Nation Lac des Mille Lacs.
Furthermore, the Custom Leadership Selection Code is the official band custom and its procedures should be followed in all subsequent selections of Chief and Council until such time as the custom is changed according to a broad consensus of the band members.
If the members of this First Nation wish to change their leadership, they will have the opportunity to do so within five years of the last selection process according to the provisions of their own Selection Code." (My emphasis)