[6]
I have examined carefully several authorities cited by counsel for the respondent but I can find in them no clear authority for the proposition advanced by counsel. Some stress was put on decisions of my learned colleague Walsh, J., in Ethicon Inc. et al. v. Cyanamid of Canada Ltd. [see footnote 2], and in Re Marchands Ro-Na Inc. and Tefal SA [see footnote 3], in which he stressed the need of balancing the summary nature of these proceedings against the desirability of the judge having before him "all information which is relevant and material to enable him to make a proper decision". I respectfully agree with that view but in the present case the respondent has done nothing to demonstrate that full cross-examination on all these affidavits is required to enable the judge who hears this appeal to have full access to all information which is relevant and material. All the respondent has done in the affidavit of Ms. Beaubien is to demonstrate that cross-examination is required to clear up certain specified ambiguities and to seek the basis for certain specified opinions stated by the affiants. Reliance was also placed on the decision of my colleague Muldoon, J., in Swing Paints Ltd. v. Miniwax Co. Inc. [see footnote 4], where he held that the cross-examination could extend to all questions upon which the affiant had knowledge and which related to the issue with respect to which the affidavit was filed. I believe that case is distinguishable as Muldoon, J., was not faced with the same issue as I have before me. In that case the parties had agreed to cross-examination on the affidavit and an order was issued, apparently in general terms, giving leave to cross-examine. Counsel for the party whose affidavits were the subject of cross-examination later sought to limit the scope of that cross-examination by relying on a rather ambiguous sentence included by him in a letter to opposing counsel confirming his client's consent to cross-examination. Muldoon, J., declined to give effect to that ambiguous reservation. While he refers to general principles concerning the obligation of affiants to subject themselves to cross-examination and cites the decisions of Walsh, J., referred to above, it was not necessary in that case for him to consider what the situation would have been had an order originally been issued for a restricted right of cross-examination. Since that decision, leave has been granted in this court under rule 704(7) restricting cross-examination to certain parts of an affidavit [see footnote 5].