[4]
The following is an edited version of the plaintiffs' summary of the facts which they say have led up to and explain the filing of the present motion:
The Facts:
1) The Plaintiffs originally filed this action in order to support a claim that their community, the Sapwagamik Metis Community, had been and continues to be materially damaged by the establishment of the Primrose Lake Air Weapons Range ("Weapons Range") and their continued exclusion therefrom. The Plaintiffs maintain that the real issue here is about their community. They wish to continue to assert the community claim.
. . . . .
2) Through three previous amendments the claim was significantly altered until in the last Statement of Claim, the 3rd, it became an action about two individuals.
3) The Plaintiffs were originally set out as one named plaintiff, Ambrose Maurice and Sapwagamik Local 176, the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan and The Métis Society of Saskatchewan. A series of motions resulted in significant amendments to the Plaintiffs. A named Plaintiff, Mervin Maurice, the son of Ambrose Maurice was added. Sapwagamik Local 176, the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan and the Métis Society of Saskatchewan were removed.
4) In the result the only remaining plaintiffs were the two named individuals. Their representative capacity on behalf of their community was lost, as were the interests of the Sapwagamik community itself. This was significant because the claim rests in large part on the Sapwagamik Metis Community's Aboriginal harvesting rights, collective rights, which were substantially infringed as a result of the establishment of the Weapons Range.
5) The fact that the Plaintiffs were reduced to two individuals was also significant because the claim asks for a Declaration that the Defendants violated the Plaintiffs' right to equal protection and equal benefit of the law without discrimination under s. 15(1) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. The Plaintiffs have, since the establishment of the Weapons Range, maintained that they, as a Métis collective, should have been treated equally to the Treaty Indian collectives of Cold Lake and Canoe Lake. This claim was not assisted if the comparison is between the treatment of two Aboriginal individuals and the treatment of an Aboriginal collective.
6) The relief claimed was also amended in the 3rd Amended Statement of Claim, to include a claim for general damages to the individually named Plaintiffs.