[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: The history of this case goes back to August 4th, 1994 when the applicant (plaintiff) Tamec Inc., hereinafter referred to as Tamec, filed into the Federal Court Registry an ex parte Notice of Motion (together with a Statement of Claim) requesting an interim injunction (Anton Piller).
[2]
The issue concerned a claim involving the issue of copyright.
[3]
The application for the interim injunction was submitted to the court together with the affidavits of a number of persons, namely Michel Lafontaine, President of Tamec, Pierre Gosselin, Linda Gray, Louise Falardeau and Nicole Forest.
[4]
An interim injunction (Anton Piller) was granted by Mr. Justice Dubé on August 9, 1994. I believe it not necessary, for the purposes of this decision, to recite the terms of the interim injunction granted by Mr. Justice Dubé.
[5]
On August 19, 1994, the defendants (respondents) other than the John Does, filed a Notice of Motion for an order setting aside the ex parte order of Mr. Justice Dubé. Attached to this motion were the affidavits of Anthony Richardson and Michael Mouyal.
[6]
On August 23, 1994, Tamec filed into the Court Registry an amended application for an interlocutory injunction with affidavits of Michel Lafontaine and Pierre Gosselin.
[7]
On August 23, 1994, Mr. Justice Joyal issued the following Order:
"HAVING THIS DAY heard submissions by counsel for the plaintiff and counsel for the defendants and considered the application to renew the provisional injunction and the affidavits and exhibits submitted by the parties,
"UNTIL THE CONTRARY IS ORDERED THE COURT DIRECTS:
- the defendant 2804166 Canada Inc., doing business under the trade name 'Centre régional de fax', its officers, directors, representatives and/or employees;
- Albert Mouyal and Mike Mouyal, directors of Centre régional de fax;
- Queen West Publishing Inc., its officers, directors, representatives and/or employees;
- Anthony Richardson, director of Queen West Publishing Inc.;
- any person acting directly or indirectly in their name or on their orders, or giving the impression of doing so;
- John Doe and John Doe Inc., not known to the plaintiff but offering for sale and/or selling l'
Annuaire Officiel des Télécopieurs du Québec
;
- any person having knowledge of the instant order;
"SUBJECT TO ALL LEGAL PENALTIES, FORTHWITH AND WITHOUT DELAY, TO:
- cease offering for sale in any manner whatever l'
Annuaire Officiel des Télécopieurs du Québec
and/or any entry whatever in the said directory;
- cease communicating by telephone, fax or otherwise with any of the undertakings listed for the purpose of making any representation whatever connected with the advertising, sale, renewal of subscriptions to or new entries in l'
Annuaire Officiel des Télécopieurs du Québec
;
- cease making any representation suggesting they are in any way connected with the plaintiff and/or suggesting that l'
Annuaire Officiel des Télécopieurs du Québec
is a product designed, created and/or published and/or sold by the plaintiff;
- cease using for any reproduction purpose under any other form or title the contents of the plaintiff's work l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
(
sic
);
- cease using any information obtained from the plaintiff's data bank 'for any reproduction purpose';
- cease selling The
Official Canadian Fax Directory
, 1995 Edition in any part of the Province of Quebec;"
[8]
This order by Mr. Justice Joyal was a continuation of the interim injunction issued by Mr. Justice Dubé with, of course, a number of changes. The continuation of the interim injunction was granted in order to permit the parties to hold examinations of the various deponents (see conditions of Mr. Justice Joyal's August 23, 1994 order).
[9]
Tamec, on October 26, 1994, filed into the Court Registry a reamended application for an interlocutory injunction.
[10]
On the same day, October 26, 1994, I began to hear Tamec's application for an interlocutory injunction. The parties had requested one day for the hearing but were unable to finish in the one day, the hearing was continued to the 16th and 17th of November 1994. The parties were unable to complete their case in the said two days. The hearing resumed on February 27, 1995. After a number of days of hearing, I believe three more days were required, on April 4, 1995, I granted Tamec's application for an interlocutory injunction by stating:
"The injunction granted by Mr. Justice Joyal on August 23, 1994 is to remain in effect to October 10, 1995 or until such time as it may be changed by court order."
[11]
The reason for granting the interlocutory injunction to October 10, 1995 "or until such time as it may be changed by court order" was that the trial date for the hearing on the merits was fixed by the court as October 10, 1995. The expiry date could, of course, have been before October 10, 1995 if changed by court order.
[12]
In any event, as a consequence of my April 4, 1995 order, Tamec presented, on August 16, 1995, an ex parte application for the issuance of a show cause order for the following reasons:
"QUANT A CENTRE RÉGIONAL DE FAX, 2204166 CANADA INC., 162013 CANADA INC., ALBERT MOUYAL ET MICHAEL (MIKE) MOUYAL:
a) fait des représentations laissant croire qu'ils sont liés avec la requérante en faisant parvenir à une de ses clientes, un bon de commande par télécopieur sur lequel le nom de l'annuaire de la requérante, soit l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
, y est indiqué comme étant le produit vendu par R.F.C. (Regional Fax Center - Centre Régional de Fax);
b) offert de vendre The
Official Canadian Fax Directory
en envoyant à une cliente de la requérante dont la place d'affaires est au Québec, une lettre d'offre par télécopieur;
c) vendu The
Official Canadian Tax Directory
sur le territoire de la province de Québec;
"QUANT À QUEEN WEST PUBLISHING ET ANTHONY RICHARDSON:
a) avoir utilisé l'oeuvre de la demanderesse l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
afin d'en reproduire son contenu en partie dans The
Official Canadian Fax Directory
1995-96;
b) avoir utilisé des données provenant de la banque de données informatique de la demanderesse afin de reproduction dans The
Official Canadian Fax Directory
1995-96."
[13]
On August 21, 1995, Mr. Justice Denault issued a show cause order ordering the defendants to appear to answer the following charges:
"REGARDING CENTRE RÉGIONAL DE FAX, 2804166 CANADA INC., 162013 CANADA INC., 174440 CANADA INC., ALBERT MOUYAL AND MICHAEL (MIKE) MOUYAL:
a) having made representations letting believe that they are related with plaintiff by way of sending to one of its client, a purchasing order by fax, on which appeared the name of plaintiff's directory, l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
, and indicating therein as a product sold by R.F.C. (Regional Fax Center - Centre Régional de Fax);
b) having offered to sell The
Official Canadian Fax Directory
by sending to one of plaintiff's client who's place of business is in the Province of Quebec, a letter of offer to sell, by faxing same;
c) having sold The
Official Canadian Fax Directory
within the territory of the Province of Quebec;
"REGARDING QUEEN WEST PUBLISHING AND ANTHONY RICHARDSON:
a) having used plaintiff's literary work l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
in order to reproduce its content in part in The
Official Canadian Fax Directory
1995-96;
b) having used the data obtained from plaintiff's data bank in order to reproduce same in The
Official Canadian Fax Directory
1995-96."
[14]
The hearing of the show cause order took place before me on September 27, 28, 29, October 2, 5 and 6, 1995.
[15]
Tamec called seven witnesses, four of which were or are still employees of the numbered companies or of the Mouyals.
[16]
For purposes of convenience, I shall divide the defendants into two groups, one group being 2804166 Canada Inc. which carries on business as Centre Régional de Fax or Regional Fax Center, 174440 Canada Inc., 162013 Canada Inc., Albert Mouyal and Michael Mouyal, hereinafter referred to as Regional Fax Centre or R.F.C. and the second group as being Queen West Publishing Limited and Anthony Richardson hereinafter referred to as Queen West or Q.W.
[17]
R.F.C. called seven witnesses with Q.W. calling two witnesses.
[18]
Before discussing the proof made before me in relation to the contempt proceedings, I believe it necessary to discuss the law applicable to contempt of court proceedings.
[19]
In the case of
Beloit Canada Ltd. v. Valmet Oy
(1986), 6 F.T.R. 241; 11 C.P.R.(3d) 470 (T.D.), at 475 and 476, I state:
"
Elements of the offence of contempt
"The elements of the offence of contempt are set out in rule 355(1). There must be disobedience to the process or order of the court, interference with the orderly administration of justice or impairment of the authority or dignity of the court.
"It is my view that the law is settled that the doing of the act which is alleged to constitute contempt must be deliberate or wilful, as opposed to casual, accidental or unintentional:
Browne v. Britnell & Co.
(1924), 27 O.W.N. 232. It must be done knowingly, that is, with full knowledge of the existence and terms of the injunction issued.
"
Standard of proof required in contempt proceedings
"Where there has been a motion to commit for contempt in violating an injunction, it has been held that, because the liberty of the person was in question (or could be in question) strong evidence
beyond a reasonable doubt
was required: see
Tilden Rent-A-Car Co. v. Rollins
(1966), 57 W.W.R. 309 (Sask. Q.B.).
"The present proceedings are not for committal of anyone. Under the
Federal Court Rules
, contempt and committal proceedings are alternate and mutually exclusive procedures. If you elect one, you cannot invoke the other thereafter (see rule 355(5)).
"In the case of
Imperial Oil v. Tanguay
, [1971] Que. C.A. 109, which dealt with a show-cause contempt proceeding as here, the court held that it should be
satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt
that the provisions in the injunction had been violated. The case of
Air Canada et al. v. Maley et al
., 77 C.L.L.C. para. 14,076 (F.C.T.D.), confirms, at pp. 103-104, that the same standard of proof is required when appearing before the Federal Court on a show-cause hearing for contempt of court pursuant to rule 355.
"It does not seem to matter where the standard of proof is required, beyond a reasonable doubt, whether the case is one of civil or criminal contempt. Mr. Justice Spence of the British Columbia Supreme Court states, in
Vance v. Vance
(1984), 50 B.C.L.R. 373 at p. 375:
'The proceedings here have to do with civil rather than criminal contempt. Nonetheless, in my view the standard of proof required is very close to, if not identified with, the standard of proof in criminal contempt, namely, proof
beyond a reasonable doubt
. Civil contempt has two aspects to it. One, as between the parties, has to do with conferring a right upon the wronged party to exercise civil execution against the wrongdoer. The other aspect has to do with redressing the apparent insult or injury done to the state by demeaning its courts. That second aspect entails upon the court the power to punish even for a civil contempt: See
Phonographic Performance Ltd. v. Amusement Caterers (Peckham) Ltd.
, [1964] 1 Ch. 195, [1963] 3 All E.R. 493. Since the punishment for civil contempt involved the liberty or property of the subject, I am of the view that proof of civil contempt must be
beyond a reasonable doubt
: See
Upper Lakes Shipping Ltd. v. Banks
(1965), 50 D.L.R.(2d) 734.' (emphasis is mine)
"It would seem that for me to find 'Valmet' or 'Valmet-Dominion' in contempt of court of the judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal of February 10, 1986, the proof to be made by 'Beloit' must convince me
beyond a reasonable doubt
that 'Valmet' or 'Valmet-Dominion' or both have so acted as to have committed contempt of the judgment."
[20]
My decision in the
Beloit Canada
case (supra) was taken to appeal. The Federal Court of Canada, Appeal Division reversed my decision but, I believe, did not reverse my decision on the issue of the law relating to contempt of court proceedings. In the appeal decision,
Beloit Canada Ltd. v. Valmet Oy
(1988), 82 N.R. 235 (F.C.A.), at 243, Mr. Justice Pratte sets out the general principles respecting contempt.
"Before discussing that judgment, it is necessary to have in mind certain elementary principles:
"(1) As rule 355(1) of the
Federal Court Rules
makes it clear, a person may be guilty of contempt of court either by disobeying an order of the court or by obstructing or interfering with the course of justice. Rule 355(1) reads as follows:
'Anyone is guilty of contempt of court who disobeys any process or order of the court or a judge thereof, or who acts in such a way as to interfere with the orderly administration of justice, or to impair the authority or dignity of the court. In particular, any officer of justice who fails to do his duty, and any sheriff or bailiff who does not execute a writ forthwith or does not make a return thereof or, in executing it, infringes any rule the violation whereof renders him liable to a penalty, is guilty of contempt of court.'
"The only person who may disobey an order of a court is the party to whom that order is addressed. However, a third party who knowingly aided and abetted a party to disobey an injunction may be found guilty of contempt, not because he breached the injunction, but, rather, because he acted in a manner that interfered with the course of justice.
"(2) A person cannot be found guilty of contempt of court if the contemptuous behaviour is not proved beyond a reasonable doubt. In such matter, the standard of proof is similar to that applicable in criminal matters.
"(3) A court injunction must be complied with strictly in accordance to its terms. However, the defendant against whom an injunction is pronounced is enjoined from committing the prohibited acts whatever be the method he may use in committing them. It follows that a defendant will be in breach of the injunction pronounced against him not only if he himself contravenes the order of the court but also if the order is breached by his agent, workman, servant or another person acting for him. See
Marengo v. Daily Sketch and Sunday Graphic Ltd.
(1948), 65 R.P.C. 242, at 253."
[21]
It would seem that for me to find the defendants in contempt of court of my decision of April 4, 1994, the proof to be made by Tamec must convince me beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendants or any one of them have so acted as to have committed contempt of this decision.
[22]
I wish to reiterate that in order to be found in contempt, the act complained of must have been done deliberately or wilfully. It must have been done knowingly, that is, with full knowledge of the existence and terms of the injunction issued.
[23]
In the case of
Bhatnager v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 217; 111 N.R. 185, at 218 (S.C.R.), under the heading Held, it is stated:
"An allegation of contempt of court is criminal (or at least quasi-criminal) in character. It is necessary, therefore, that the constituent elements of contempt be proved by the party alleging contempt beyond a reasonable doubt."
[24]
With regard to the issue of knowledge, Mr. Justice Sopinka states at page 224 (S.C.R.):
"It is well to remember at the outset that an allegation of contempt of court is a matter of criminal (or at least quasi-criminal) dimension; see
Poje v. Attorney General for British Columbia
, [1953] 1 S.C.R. 516, per Kellock, J., at pp. 517-518; and
In re Bramblevale Ltd.
, [1970] Ch. 128 (C.A.), per Lord Denning, M.R., at p. 137. In the present case, a finding of guilt could have subjected the appellants to a fine of as much as $5,000 and the possibility of imprisonment to a maximum of one year; see rule 355(2). It is necessary, therefore, that the constituent elements of contempt be proved against the appellants, and proved beyond a reasonable doubt."
[25]
Mr. Justice Marceau, in the
Beloit v. Valmet Oy
decision (supra) states at pages 247 and 248 (N.R.):
"Considering what has to be proved, it is well-established that the activity said to have constituted the contempt must be one clearly covered by the prohibition, which implies that it be expressly or by necessary inference mentioned in the order.
"Coming now to the quality of the proof, it is also well-established that it must be of the high standard necessary for a criminal conviction, not the lower standard sufficient to dispose of a disputed question of fact in a civil litigation. The proof must satisfy beyond any reasonable doubt."
[26]
Furthermore, it is only in respect of the acts alleged in Tamec's notice of application for a show cause order that a finding of contempt may lie.
[27]
I stated in
Titan Linkabit Corp. v. S.E.E. See Electronic Engineering Inc. et al.
(1993), 59 F.T.R. 241; 46 C.P.R.(3d) 325 (T.D.) at 342:
"It is only in respect of the acts alleged in the defendants' notice of application that a finding of contempt may lie. I agree with counsel for plaintiffs when he states 'The alleged contemner has the right, consistent with the principles of fundamental justice, to know exactly the case it has to meet'."
[28]
Therefore, one must look at the show cause order issued by Mr. Justice Denault to see what it is the defendants are accused to have done contrary to the terms of the injunction issued against them on April 4, 1995.
[29]
As I have stated, the burden of proving, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the defendants have contravened the terms of the interlocutory injunction issued against them is on the plaintiff, Tamec. In order to do so, Tamec presented the following evidence through its seven witnesses.
[30]
Ms. Maureen Brochu is the purchasing supervisor for H. L. Blachford Ltd. She is in charge of purchasing all materials, including books and chemicals. One of her functions at H.L. Blachford Ltd. is to purchase fax directories and has, since 1989-90, purchased the fax directory l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
, hereinafter referred to as
L.T.Q.
Exhibit P-1 is an invoice for the purchase of an
L.T.Q.
directory for the 1994 year by H.L. Blachford Ltd.
[31]
Ms. Brochu gave evidence that on July 17, 1995 she received a telephone call from a Daniel Roy who introduced himself, she states, as a representative of
L.T.Q.
and that he was calling "concerning renewal of my subscription to the fax directory". Ms. Brochu agreed to renew and asked Mr. Roy to send her the necessary information by fax.
[32]
Immediately after this telephone conversation, she went to verify her records and noticed that it was in January 1995 that she had received a fax directory and thought it "a little early" to be receiving a call for a renewal. As a result, she contacted, by fax, a Mr. Gosselin who works for
L.T.Q.
,
L.T.Q.
being Tamec's publication. The fax sent to
L.T.Q.
by Ms. Brochu was sent to the attention of Daniel Roy (see Exhibit P-2). (Roy may, I believe, also be spelled Roi).
[33]
I have difficulty in understanding why Ms. Brochu would send the fax, Exhibit P-2, to a Mr. Roi's attention when she stated that
she sent the fax to Mr. Gosselin
by using "Mr. Gosselin's fax number".
[34]
In any event, Mr. Gosselin telephoned Ms. Brochu to inform her that there was no Daniel Roi employed by plaintiff and explained that plaintiff was having "some problems with some company and that there was an injunction against the company".
[35]
A day or two after the July 17, 1995 conversations, Ms. Brochu states she heard from a Christine Whyte who stated she was calling on behalf of Daniel Roy and asked if Ms. Brochu wanted to renew her subscription to which she replied yes and asked Ms. Whyte to fax her "the information and the order form".
[36]
Ms. Brochu states she received a purchase order form which was filed as Exhibit P-3. Exhibit P-3 is a purchase order form from R.F.C. and speaks of l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
, which is Tamec's fax directory.
[37]
Ms. Brochu also stated that she received, at the very same time as she received Exhibit P-3, a letter signed by Christine Whyte on stationery of The
Official Canadian Fax Directory
which is, according to this letter, distributed by Regional Fax Center (R.F.C.). This letter filed as Exhibit P-4 is the covering letter sent to explain Exhibit P-3.
[38]
Ms. Brochu faxed back to R.F.C. the order form and received a fax directory from R.F.C. and which fax directory was filed as Exhibit P-5.
[39]
Exhibit P-5, the fax directory sent by R.F.C. to Ms. Brochu is called l'
Annuaire Officiel Canadien des Télécopieurs
, The
Official Canadian Fax Directory Édition du Québec 1995/1996 Quebec Edition
.
[40]
Ms. Brochu states that in completing order form P-3, she knew she was ordering a fax directory "from the people that I usually ordered from" and that she believed she was ordering l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
. Exhibit P-6 is the invoice for Exhibit P-5 and it is an invoice from R.F.C.
[41]
It is interesting to note that Ms. Brochu, in her examination-in-chief by counsel for Tamec, states, as regards her conversation with Ms. Whyte, that there was no conversation or at least "not to my knowledge" any conversation of the
Canadian Fax Directory
and it was only on receiving Exhibit P-4 that she heard or saw that name. Nor was the name mentioned by Daniel Roy.
[42]
Ms. Brochu also states and I have great difficulty in accepting her testimony that when she received Exhibit P-5 she "was annoyed and I was kind of mad because I was led to believe that I was ordering from l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
, from Mr. Lafontaine's company and I was mad. I was annoyed that I was just about being taken for a fool, and this was why I agreed to help them out by purchasing the book (Exhibit P-5)".
[43]
I cannot understand these statements of Ms. Brochu. Why would Ms. Brochu, upon receiving Exhibit P-5 get annoyed or mad or believe she was being taken for a "fool". Before she ordered Exhibit P-5, the
Canadian Fax Directory Quebec Edition
, she had spoken to Mr. Gosselin of Tamec and knew, when she placed the order she was not going to receive the directory
L.T.Q.
from R.F.C. Furthermore, in cross-examination, Ms. Brochu admits that before ordering Exhibit P-5 she agreed to act for Mr. Gosselin, Tamec's representative. I cannot accept her testimony when she states she was annoyed on receiving Exhibit P-5 "because in the beginning they were calling me representing themselves as someone else and then I received a
Canadian Fax Directory
. To me, it wasn't the same company that was calling me in the beginning".
[44]
Furthermore,
plaintiff's own witnesses
, Daniel Roy and Christine Whyte, deny ever saying that they represent
L.T.Q.
More of this later.
[45]
It is also interesting to note that, during most of Ms. Brochu's cross-examination on what fax directory she expected to receive, after being told by Mr. Gosselin to order the fax directory, she appeared to try to evade giving direct answers (see pages 36 to 40).
[46]
With the utmost respect for Ms. Brochu, I cannot accept her evidence as credible. Ms. Brochu, from the moment she spoke to Mr. Gosselin knew that there was no Daniel Roi working for Tamec, knew, after being asked to complete the order form Exhibit P-3 by Mr. Gosselin that she would not receive Tamec's fax directory. This is all the more evident as she received with Exhibit P-3 a covering letter, Exhibit P-4, with information about the directory she was ordering.
"The
Official
Canadian Fax Directory
Distributed by
REGIONAL FAX CENTER
740 Notre Dame W., 15th Floor, Montreal Quebec, H3C 3X6
Fax: (514) 879-1879 National Toll Free/ Sans Frais: 1-800-463-7734
# of Pages: 2
Date: July 19th 95
Attention: Moreen Brochu
Company/Organization: H.L. Blanchford Ltd/Ltee
Telephone: (514) 938-9775
Facsimile: (514) 938-8595
RFC Representative: Christine Whyte
Dear Ms Brochu,
As per our conversation, I am sending the information you requested about the
Official Canadian Fax Directory
. Please feel free to contact my office with questions or comments about the directory at the toll free number shown above. One of our customer service representatives will be glad to assist you.
The
Official Canadian Fax Directory
is the largest directory available in the country. It is a compilation of corporations, small and medium-sized businesses, as well as important government offices at the federal, provincial and municipal levels. The directory also includes a variety of other listings such as national and regional organizations, associations and key institutions.
More than 180,000 listings
Listed by Region .... Atlantic, Quebec,
Ontario & Western
Classification by product/activity
*Full Address
*Postal Code
*Fax Number
*Phone Number
Plus ... Thousands of 1-800 Numbers ....
The
Official Canadian Fax Directory
is a proven office tool. Satisfied clients report tremendous savings in time, energy, and most important, money. Our easy-to-use format allows companies and public sector organizations instant access to established and potential clients, as well as putting them in touch with you.
Cost: $179.00 for listing and updated copy of the
Official Canada FAX Directory
I will contact you earlier next week to receive the outcome of the fax
'C. Whyte.'"
(Exhibit P-4)
[47]
Surely after speaking to Mr. Gosselin and seeing Exhibit P-4, Ms. Brochu could not have been surprised when she received the
Official Canadian Fax Directory Special Quebec 1995/96 Edition
.
[48]
This is confirmed by the following exchange that I had with Ms. Brochu.
"BY THE COURT: Madame, if I am going to look at these documents, P-3 and P-4, P-4 is number one. P-3 is number two, page two. The first document that you would have normally seen, assuming you get them in the order that they were received, would be The
Official Canadian Fax Directory
letter of explanation.
BY THE WITNESS: Yes, 'mm hmm.
BY THE COURT: That is what you said you got, and it said distributed by Regional Fax Center, and then the second document was the order form.
BY THE WITNESS: Yes.
BY THE COURT: Now, would you not have thought that the order form that you got, where it says l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
would have referred to The
Official Canadian Fax Directory
?
BY THE WITNESS:
Well, I got them both at the same time.
BY THE COURT: Yes, and the first one that you would have gotten ...
BY THE WITNESS: Was the one with Christine Whyte's name on it.
BY THE COURT: ... is the one with Christine Whyte's name on it.
BY THE WITNESS: Yes, at the top here. She said she was sending me ...
BY THE COURT: All right, that is fine. Fair enough. So, that is The
Official Canadian Fax Directory
?
BY THE WITNESS: This page here, yes, the first one.
BY THE COURT: The first one is The
Canadian Fax Directory
, and the second document was an order form, which you obviously knew, I am assuming, and you correct me please. You knew that you were completing an order form for the
Canadian Fax Directory
?
BY THE WITNESS: Yes, on talking to Mr. Gosselin." (pages 50 to 52, vol. 1, September 27, 1995 transcript)
[49]
What is evident is that Ms. Brochu, when she asked to have an order form sent to her office with the necessary information received an order form for the directory known as l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
(Exhibit P-3) with a covering letter (Exhibit P-4) from R.F.C. for The
Official Canadian Fax Directory
. Exhibit P-4 does not, in itself, say anything of Exhibit P-5 l'
Annuaire Officiel Canadien des Télécopieurs Édition Québec 1995/1996
. The evidence of Roy and Whyte is that Ms. Brochu was told that they were selling The
Official Canadian Fax Directory Special Quebec Edition
, Exhibit P-5.
[50]
Plaintiff also called Lise Perron to give evidence as to what occurred when she was called by a representative of R.F.C.
[51]
Ms. Perron is a clerk at the Fiducie Desjardins in the telecommunication department. She is in charge, amongst other functions, of ordering fax directories. She states that her employer chose to purchase and use the fax directory of Tamec, that is, l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
and this as of July 29, 1992.
[52]
Ms. Perron, when asked if she recently received a call to sell her a subscription to a fax directory, replied that she received a call, she believes, from a company called Central Fax Division, from a certain Laurie Wexler.
[53]
Ms. Perron corrected herself when she was again asked what company had contacted her and she stated "Attendez un petit peu. Non, ce n'est pas ça du tout. Je m'excuse. Je mélange avec une autre compagnie, Regional Fax Center".
[54]
What I get from this reply is that a Ms. Laurie Wexler of Regional Fax Center contacted her concerning a fax directory and this on the 17th of August (1995).
[55]
When asked by counsel for plaintiff what was the conversation about with Ms. Wexler, Ms. Perron states:
"Q. Et quel était le but de cet appel et quelle a été la conversation que vous avez eue avec elle?
R. Madame Wexler s'est nommée. Elle a nommé le nom de la compagnie. Elle m'a demandé: 'C'est pour Trustco Desjardins. Est-ce que vous voulez renouveler votre inscription dans notre Annuaire? Alors moi, vu que j'inscris juste dans l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
puis que le nom m'a comme sonné bizarre, j'ai dit: "Est-ce que ça concerne l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
?" Elle m'a dit: "Oui." Elle a dit: "C'est nous qui s'en occupons".'
Ça fait que je lui ai demandé, j'ai dit: 'Est-ce que vous pouvez m'envoyer un bon de commande avec les inscriptions, un fax contenant toutes mes inscriptions', parce que je lui ai dit que Trustco Desjardins n'existait plus, maintenant on n'était que Fiducie Desjardins parce qu'on a dissout 3 compagnies. J'avais des corrections à faire et je voulais voir le bon de commande.
Alors, elle m'a demandé mon numéro de fax et elle m'a dit qu'elle était pour m'envoyer ça par fax dans la journée." (page 66, vol. 1, September 27, 1995 transcript)
[56]
What I get from this reply by Ms. Perron is that when Ms. Wexler spoke with Ms. Perron she stated that she was a representative of R.F.C., "Elle a nommé le nom de la compagnie" and because the name Regional Fax Center sounded "bizarre" to Ms. Perron she asked Ms. Wexler if the call concerned l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
and was told yes.
[57]
As a result of this conversation, Ms. Perron states she received three documents filed under Exhibit P-8 en liasse.
[58]
Exhibit P-8 en liasse contains three pages, the first P 04/06 is a fax cover sheet from R.F.C. which states:
"Enclosed you will find the information you requested on our publications. Please do not hesitate to call us if you have further questions. We thank you for your interest in our directories and welcome any suggestions you may have."
[59]
On the second page of Exhibit P-8, P 05/06 and on the third page P 06/06 the publications shown are l'
Annuaire Officiel Canadien des Télécopieurs Quebec Edition 1995/96
, the
Canadian Fax Directory
, the
Official Ontario Fax Directory
and the
Official Western Canadian Fax Directory
.
[60]
There is no mention on Exhibit P-8 of
L.T.Q.
, the plaintiff's directory. One must wonder why the name l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
would be used in the attempt to sell if the salesperson knows full well that on the material to be sent to the prospective purchaser, the name l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
is not shown as a publication to be sold.
[61]
Here too, as in the case with Ms. Brochu, the salesperson Laurie Wexler, who appeared as plaintiff's witness denied mentioning plaintiff's directory.
[62]
Ms. Perron, upon receiving Exhibit P-8 en liasse, became confused as she noticed that Exhibit P-8 was in English and because she believed that the document should have been sent in the French language she decided to contact
L.T.Q.
and spoke to Mr. Gosselin who explained that there was a company that was attempting "se passer pour eux (plaintiff) pour des inscriptions".
[63]
On August 25 (1995) Ms. Perron had a second telephone conversation with Ms. Wexler.
"Q. Alors, pourriez-vous nous dire comment il se fait que vous avez eu cette autre conversation avec madame Wexler?
R. Elle m'a appelée. Elle m'a dit: 'Ici Laurie Wexler de la compagnie Regional Fax Division', je crois -- non, Center -- excusez. Elle m'a demandé: 'Est-ce que vous avez pris une décision si vous voulez renouveler votre inscription dans notre Annuaire, l'Annuaire puis que tant que je n'aurais pas toutes mes inscriptions de
faxées
, je ne prenais aucune décision.'" (pages 71 and 72, vol. 1, September 27, 1995 transcript)
[64]
In cross-examination, Ms. Perron admits to never having read Exhibit P-8 (see pages 75 and 76, vol. 1, September 27, 1995 transcript) and then states she did not read Exhibit P-8 but did read the names, I assume of defendants' publications. Ms. Perron states "J'ai juste lu les noms. Je n'ai pas lu le document. J'ai juste regardé les noms."
[65]
In her testimony, Ms. Perron states, in cross-examination, as regards her second conversation with Ms. Wexler:
"Q. Puis environ une semaine plus tard, vous avez reçu un appel de Laurie Wexler?
R. Oui.
Q. En vous demandant si vous étiez prête à commander l'Annuaire de fax?
R. Oui. l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
.
Q. C'est ça qu'elle vous avait demandé?
R.
Non. Quand elle m'a rappelée, elle m'a dit si j'étais prête à renouveler mes inscriptions dans leur Annuaire, l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur
. C'est ce qu'on m'a dit la deuxième fois.
Q. La deuxième fois, elle n'a pas mentionné l'Annuaire ...
R. Elle a mentionné l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur
.
Q. Madame, est-ce que je peux terminer une question avant de répondre s'il vous plaît?
R. Oui.
Q. Pendant ce deuxième appel, même après que vous avez reçu ces 3 pages-là, même après que vous avez vu la mention sur la page 3 de l'
Annuaire de l'Ontario
et du
Western Canada
et de
United States Fax Directory
, même après que vous avez vu ça, quand elle vous avait rappelée, elle vous avait demandé si vous étiez intéressée ou si vous aviez décidé de renouveler votre inscription dans leur Annuaire.
À ce moment, avez-vous demandé à Laurier Wexler quel annuaire?
R.
Pas du tout. Elle m'a demandé si j'étais prête pour faire renouveler mes inscriptions dans leur Annuaire, l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur
. Je ne lui ai pas demandé parce que je savais qu'elle ne faisait pas partie de l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
.
Ça fait que je ne lui aurais pas demandé. C'est elle-même qui me l'a dit.
Q. C'est-à-dire dans leur
Annuaire du Télécopieur
puis elle n'a pas fait mention soit du Québec, soit du Canada, soit de l'Ontario, soit de l'Ouest, de la Colombie-Britannique?
R. Non. C'est ça.
Q. Dans leur Annuaire?
R. C'est ça." (emphasis added) (pages 77 and 78, vol. 1, September 27, 1995 transcript)
[66]
I am satisfied that at no time during Ms. Perron's second conversation did R.F.C.'s representative, Ms. Wexler, attempt to sell Ms. Perron the
L.T.Q.
nor did she say anything to make Ms. Perron believe she was a representative of Tamec and selling the
L.T.Q.
fax directory.
[67]
Plaintiff called as its witness Fouad Saad (a.k.a. Daniel Roy), a 19 year old student. Mr. Saad worked for R.F.C. from May 25, 1995 to mid-July 1995 as a telemarketer. His function was to telephone various businesses and attempt to sell them a fax directory. Exhibit P-5 is an example of a fax directory that he attempted to sell but only for the "last two or three weeks of my job". That is, Mr. Saad attempted to sell Exhibit P-5, the
Official Canadian Fax Directory Special Quebec Edition
from the last week of June 1995 to when he left R.F.C.'s employ in the middle of July 1995. Previously, that is from the 25th of May 1995, he was selling The
Official Canadian Fax Directory
"and that was outside Quebec" only.
[68]
Mr. Saad stated that in attempting to make sales in the Province of Quebec, he usually spoke French. He states that when he was hired to sell the fax directories, he had a two hour training period in which he was told what he should say, in fact he was given a written document to follow. When asked to repeat the sales statement, Mr. Saad, from memory stated:
"A. We would say: 'je vous appelle concernant l'inscription de votre compagnie avec nous dans l'
Annuaire Officiel Canadien des Télécopieurs, Édition Spéciale pour le Québec
.' Après ça, on lisait leur inscription, le nom de la compagnie ainsi que leur adresse et d'autres choses. Après ça, on disait ..." (page 84, vol. 1, September 27, 1995 transcript)
[69]
What is of note is that Mr. Saad states the call concerns the listing of the prospective customers in l'
Annuaire Officiel Canadien des Télécopieurs Édition Spéciale pour le Québec
. Clearly, Mr. Saad does not mention
L.T.Q.
as the fax directory being sold.
[70]
Mr. Saad goes on to say, on the same page of the transcript:
"BY Me LAFLAMME-ROBINSON:
Q. Did you use the words 'renouvellement de votre inscription'?
A. Yes. Après ça, on disait: 'La raison que j'appelle ...' -- je ne sais pas exactement -- 'j'appelle pour le renouvellement de votre inscription avec nous'."
"PAR Me LAFLAMME-ROBINSON:
'Le renouvellement de votre inscription avec nous'.
"PAR LE TÉMOIN:
"Après ça, ce n'est pas exactement clair, ce n'est pas le mot à mot, mais on disait: 'Vous étiez inscrit avec nous dans le passé' et que c'était le renouvellement."
[71]
He also states that if he was asked to send a copy of the listing to the prospective buyer, he could not do so because he did not have a copy of the listing when attempting to make a sale and furthermore, his supervisor said "that they don't do that".
[72]
Upon being shown Exhibit P-3, the order form with the words
L.T.Q.
, he states he never saw this form with what is written on it but saw forms similar to it as it was used as an order form.
[73]
He also clearly stated that the only publication he would sell in the Province of Quebec was l'
Annuaire Officiel Canadien des Télécopieurs
and that an example of what he sold is Exhibit P-5.
[74]
Upon being shown Exhibit P-9, a document emanating from R.F.C., Mr. Saad states he has never seen or used such a presentation. Exhibit P-9 speaks of l'
Annuaire Officiel des Télécopieurs du Québec
, and that he has never used the name l'
Annuaire Officiel des Télécopieurs du Québec
in any presentation in Quebec. In fact, Mr. Saad states that for the Province of Quebec, the presentation used by him is found in Exhibit P-2. In this document, the only name used is l'
Annuaire Officiel Canadien des Télécopieurs Édition Spéciale pour le Québec
.
[75]
To a question put to this witness concerning the sales presentation, Mr. Saad states:
"Q. So when you called people, isn't it a fact that you told them not only that you were selling l'
Annuaire Officiel Canadien des Télécopieurs
, but you also added '
Edition Special Pour le Québec
', correct?
A. 'mm hmm.
Q. That is what you told whoever you called in Quebec?
A. Yes.
Q. Mr. Saad, did you ever derogate from that, or is that the sheet you read from when you made your sixty or a hundred or a hundred and forty calls a day?
A. That is the one I read from.
Q. Over and over and over again?
A. Yes.
BY THE COURT: I didn't hear the answer, though. Did you ever derogate from it?
BY THE WITNESS: No, I didn't."
(Pages 105 and 106, Volume 1, September 27, 1995 transcript)
[76]
Mr. Saad also states that for the period of time that he worked for R.F.C., that is May to July 1995, he never saw and he never attempted to sell the
L.T.Q.
In the Province of Quebec, he only attempted to sell l'
Annuaire Officiel Canadien des Télécopieurs Édition Spéciale pour le Québec
.
[77]
This obviously contradicts the evidence of Ms. Brochu who stated that Daniel Roy (also known as Fouad Saad) told her that he was the representative of
L.T.Q.
or that he was attempting to sell her the
L.T.Q.
[78]
Plaintiff also called Syliane Roumy as its witness. Ms. Roumy worked for R.F.C. as a telemarketer using the name Monique Lemieux from June 7, 1995 to August 16, 1995. When shown Exhibit P-5, l'
Annuaire Officiel Canadien des Télécopieurs Édition Québec 1995/1996
, she states that she sold this directory in Quebec. She commenced to sell Exhibit P-5 in mid-July 1995. Up to mid-July, she was selling the
Official Canadian Fax Directory
outside of the Province of Quebec.
[79]
When asked by counsel for Tamec to recite from memory her sales presentation for the Province of Quebec, Ms. Roumy states:
"D'accord. Je disais: 'C'est Monique Lemieux du Centre Régional de Fax. Je vous appelle concernant l'inscription de votre compagnie dans l'
Annuaire Officiel Canadien des Télécopieurs, Édition Spéciale pour le Québec
, et puis nous vous avons présentement inscrit sous', on lisait l'adresse. 'Est-ce que ces informations sont toujours correctes?' Après ça, on disait: 'C'est concernant le renouvellement. Nous aimerions savoir si votre compagnie désire toujours maintenir son inscription pour les deux prochaines années et recevoir la nouvelle édition faite spécialement pour le Québec.'" (page 7, vol. 2, September 27, 1995 transcript)
[80]
It is obvious, and I accept it as a fact, that for sales of R.F.C.'s directory for the Province of Quebec, this witness never referred to the
L.T.Q.
It is also clear that she states she is calling for R.F.C. and not, in any way, indicating she is calling for plaintiff or for
L.T.Q.
[81]
This is confirmed by the fact that when Ms. Roumy was shown Exhibit P-3 where one sees the words
L.T.Q.
she states she may have seen the document but has never used it.
[82]
When shown Exhibit P-10, she explained that when a client asks for more information she sends out the documents found in Exhibit P-10 en liasse. Exhibit P-10 is a Fax cover sheet from R.F.C. to Brizard Laflamme Robinson.
[83]
It is interesting to note that Exhibit P-10 was sent to Brizard Laflamme Robinson who are counsel for the plaintiff.
[84]
I assume that Exhibit P-10 was sent after a sales presentation to the law firm. Surely, if Ms. Roumy had attempted to sell
L.T.Q.
or even had mentioned this directory, I would have heard such evidence. No such evidence was made, indicating to me that Ms. Roumy only tried to sell R.F.C.'s directory, that is, Exhibit P-5.
[85]
Mr. Lafontaine is the President of Tamec Inc. In giving his evidence, he referred to a document, Exhibit P-11, referred to by counsel for plaintiff as a Check List. This Check List is a comparison made by Mr. Lafontaine in comparing
Edition Canada 95
(Exhibit P-18)
vs Canada 95-96
(Exhibit P-5).
[86]
He states that when he first saw Exhibit P-5 he believed it was very similar to Exhibit P-18 which he states was subject to the interlocutory injunction and as a result he made a detailed analysis of the two directories as per the Check List (Exhibit P-11).
[87]
Mr. Lafontaine states, and it was never contradicted or denied, that Exhibit P-5 was published by Queen West Publishing (Q.W.) and distributed by Regional Fax Center (R.F.C.).
[88]
He states there is a strong similarity in the Table of Contents. He also states the structure of Exhibit P-5 is the same as Exhibit P-18, that is, there are and were four divisions or regions and the structure of the listings are the same. Mr. Lafontaine also states that he examined the "white" section the Government section, etc. and found them similar.
[89]
In speaking of how he made his comparison of the two directories, he states:
"Le plus simple dans une vérification, c'est d'essayer de retrouver les fautes d'orthographe commises par nous et qui sont répétées par l'éditeur de la publication en question. Alors nous avons tout simplement repris de façon succincte 17 inscriptions qui comportaient des fautes d'orthographe qui avaient été soulignées par écrit au moment de l'interlocutoire et qui sont reprises dans cette publication-là." (page 48, vol. 2, September 27, 1995 transcript)
[90]
The 17 listings are found in Exhibit P-13. In looking at Exhibit P-13, it is apparent that the errors are of a minor nature but nevertheless I am satisfied these errors were on the "Marcus" list which came from the
L.T.Q.
directory which were found in Exhibit P-18 and are now in Exhibit P-5. (The reason why these "errors" are included is explained by Ms. Hewitt, the database manager for Q.W.)
[91]
Mr. Lafontaine explained his sources for his own listings. It is obviously very complicated procedure because he has to use many sources for his listings. He gives an example:
"Donc, pour ce qui est de la première inscription, par exemple, Bois-Francs Lavallée, dans notre ordinateur, on avait une référence comme quoi c'était M88206.31 Alors M88, ça, ça veut dire l'édition 1988 des Pages Jaunes de Montréal. 206.31, ça veut dire que c'est la troisième colonne puis c'est la première rubrique de la troisième colonne." (page 61, vol. 2, September 27, 1995 transcript)
[92]
Clearly, Mr. Lafontaine gets his listings from sources such as "des pages jaunes de Montréal" as does Q.W. As well, Mr. Lafontaine gets his information for listings (source) from l'
Annuaire de Québec
, e.g., (for his listing of Caisse Populaire St-Étienne de Lauzon) or the
Annuaire de St-Jérome
.
[93]
In being cross-examined by counsel for Q.W. regarding the differences between Exhibits P-5 and P-18 relating to listings of caisse populaires and construction companies, I am satisfied that Mr. Lafontaine admits to certain differences (Page 62 and following, September 28, 1995 transcript).
[94]
I am satisfied, after reviewing the evidence, that of the seventeen listings given as examples by Mr. Lafontaine (found on Exhibit P-13) that these listings are not exactly listed, in the main, as they were in Exhibit P-18 or Exhibit P-5.
[95]
Plaintiff also called Christine Whyte as a witness (also known as Christine Leblanc). Ms. Whyte is a student and an employee of R.F.C. and has been from June of 1994. She is a sales representative for R.F.C. as well "I also help out a lot around the office". She states she sells fax directories "they have different covers. We have a special edition for Quebec and one also for Canada". In selling, she uses the written sales presentation given to her by R.F.C. She sells by telephone.
[96]
She states she sold fax directories in the Province of Quebec from June 1994 to August 1994 and then from the middle of July 1995. The directory she sold in the Province of Quebec, from July 1995, is Exhibit P-5.
[97]
In speaking of the written sales presentation, for the Exhibit P-5 directory, Ms. Whyte states that the written sales presentation is different from that used by her between June and August 1994.
[98]
When asked to repeat the sales presentation for Exhibit P-5, Ms. Whyte, from memory, states:
"I would call up and say: 'Est-ce que je peux parler avec "whatever", mon nom est Christine Leblanc du Centre régional de fax. Je vous appelle concernant l'inscription de votre compagnie avec nous, dans l'
Annuaire Officiel des Télécopieurs Canadien
, notre édition spécialement pour Québec. Présentement vous êtes inscrit sous "and I'd quote their address and also their fax number". "Then, I'd say": "Présentement, on est en train de mettre à jour notre inscription, puis nous aimerions savoir si vous désirez maintenir votre inscription pour les deux prochaines années qui suivent et aussi recevrez la nouvelle édition qui est maintenant avec couverture rigide". "And then, I'd say if they ask the price", "Le coût demeure le même que, le coût est à le même, à cent soixante-dix neuf (179$) puis avec la couverture rigide".'" (Page 14, vol. 2, September 28, 1995 transcript)
[99]
This confirms what Mr. Saad and Ms. Roumy have stated. Here are three of plaintiff's witnesses who unequivocally state that the only directory they attempted to sell in the Province of Quebec from July 1995 is L'
Annuaire Officiel Canadien des Télécopieurs Édition du Québec 1995/1996
.
[100]
Ms. Whyte also states that if the prospective customer asked for a copy of their listing and insisted on seeing it, they would send a copy of the listing
as found in Exhibit P-5
and
not
as found in any other directory.
[101]
Ms. Whyte's French sales presentation was filed as Exhibit P-17 and only speaks of Exhibit P-5, the
Official Canadian Fax Directory Special Quebec Edition for 1995/1996
.
[102]
When shown Exhibit P-9, which is the Quebec Sales presentation for l'
Annuaire Officiel des Télécopieurs du Québec
, Ms. Whyte states this sales presentation was used by her from June to the end of July/August 1994 after which time she no longer sold this directory.
[103]
She also states that approximately one month later she was no longer permitted to sell the
Canadian Fax Directory
in Quebec and therefore did not sell this directory in Quebec nor did she sell any other directory in Quebec until July 1995.
[104]
Ms. Whyte relates that when she was told she could not sell l'
Annuaire Officiel du Télécopieur du Québec
in Quebec all the "selling material" was "confiscated and thrown out". Ms. Whyte explained that the "selling material" for the
Quebec Fax Directory
was in the Manager's office. The "selling material" for the
Canadian Fax Directory
was kept but only used for sales outside of Quebec.
[105]
When shown Exhibit P-3, R.F.C.'s order form for the
L.T.Q.
directory sent by Ms. Whyte to Ms. Brochu together with Exhibit P-4, the information sheet for the
Official Canadian Tax Directory
, in reply as to how Exhibit P-3 was sent to Mrs. Brochu, Ms. Whyte states:
"A. Well, with all the shuffling of papers and things going in and out of the office, there must have been a paper -- obviously this one -- that got -- that fell through the crack, that just didn't get thrown out, and I was the one to pick it up and fax it out.
Q. Other than this sheet of paper with l'
Annuaire du Télécopieur du Québec
on it, since you received instructions not to sell the
Quebec Fax Directory
in Quebec, have you seen another sheet of paper like this?
A. No, I have not.
Q. You have not. Now, when you sent her that piece of paper, did you send anything else with it?
A. Yes, I did. I sent ...
Q. I show you here Exhibit P-4.
A. That is -- P-4 is what I did send out with the other exhibit.
Q. With P-3?
A. With P-3.
Q. And P-4 is styled? Read it, please?
A. 'The
Official Canadian Fax Directory
'.
Q. Therefore, was P-3 being sent with P-4 surely an accident or error of chance?
A. Yes, it was." (pages 45 and 46, vol. 2, September 28, 1995 transcript)
[106]
I am satisfied that this is a perfectly plausible explanation when viewed with her testimony as to what she sold and when she sold directories in the Province of Quebec.
[107]
When asked of her conversation with Ms. Brochu, she states she does not remember the exact phone call (quite understandable) but states "but I do remember what I said to her".
[108]
It is hard to imagine how this witness would remember what she said to Ms. Brochu when she does not remember the exact phone call, but Ms. Whyte does say she remembers "what I would have said had it been a normal call" and that she
could not
have told Ms. Brochu she was a representative of
L.T.Q.
because "I always say l'
Annuaire de Télécopieur Canadien, Édition du Québec
, always".
[109]
Ms. Whyte, plaintiff's witness, when told that Ms. Brochu had given evidence, at one point by affidavit and before me, that Ms. Whyte had stated she was a representative of
L.T.Q.
, states "I would have to say that she would not be telling the truth".
[110]
I accept Ms. Whyte's evidence as the more credible evidence when related to the other evidence given by plaintiff's witnesses who were or are employees of R.F.C.
[111]
Plaintiff called as its witness Ms. Wendy Sutherland, also known as Laurie Wexler. (It appears that all the witnesses who are or were employed by R.F.C. as a telephone sales representative used a fictitious name).
[112]
Ms. Sutherland is employed by R.F.C. as a "telemarketer", she sells fax directories by means of the use of the telephone. As was stated by Fouad Saad, Syliane Roumy and Andrea Christine Whyte, she states she sold fax directories in Canada, including the Province of Quebec. That she used both the English and French languages to sell the fax directories and to sell these directories she was given a written text to follow. When asked to recite, from memory, her presentation in both French and English, she attempted to do so but states "in French I usually read it out the paper".
[113]
The witness was shown Exhibit P-17 and states that it was the text used. As previously stated, it speaks of Exhibit P-5, the Quebec Special Edition fax directory.
[114]
Exhibit P-8 en liasse was sent to Ms. Perron by this witness. She was, she states, attempting to sell Ms. Perron The
Official Canadian Fax Directory Quebec Edition 1995/1996
and only that publication, Exhibit P-5. She also confirms what the other plaintiff's witnesses have stated, that it was in July 1995 that this publication began to be sold.
[115]
As with the other witnesses selling directories for R.F.C., Ms. Sutherland states and confirms that she
never
sold
L.T.Q.
and that she had never seen this publication on R.F.C.'s premises. She also states that she never had nor saw any advertising material or fax cover sheets or order sheets with the name
L.T.Q.
on it.
[116]
She, as well, states that from the time she commenced working for R.F.C. in November 1994 to July 1995 she never sold anything in the Province of Quebec and it was in July 1995 that she began to sell Exhibit P-5.
[117]
Ms. Sutherland states, and this without hesitation, and as plaintiff's witness, that she never and more particularly, in July 1995, attempted to sell a fax directory by stating she was a representative of
L.T.Q.
[118]
Plaintiff submitted no other proof.
[119]
The defendant Albert Mouyal, on his own behalf and on behalf of the numbered companies gave evidence. He is the Managing Director of R.F.C. He states that up to the month of August 1994, R.F.C. sold a
Quebec Fax Directory
, a
Canadian Fax Directory
and a
U.S. Fax Directory
. He states that as a result of an injunction, in August 1994, R.F.C. was prohibited from selling the
Official Quebec Fax Directory
in the Province of Quebec. As a result, he held a meeting with his "key people" to instruct them not to sell in the Province of Quebec and to make sure no material, no product, no information was disseminated "from our office ... having to do anything with the Quebec Directory.
[120]
He states this meeting was held in the presence of Justin Pold and Charles McCulloch, sales managers, Rick Aquino, Customer Service Manager, Denis Gobeil, Head Shipper at the time and with Richard Myrtle, his Controller.
[121]
Mr. Mouyal then explained what steps were taken to remove all the directories and selling material (see page 79, vol. 2, September 28, 1995 transcript).
[122]
Mr. Mouyal held a second meeting "two, three weeks after" as a result of being told R.F.C. could not sell the
Canadian Fax Directory
in the Province of Quebec and instructed his key personnel, relating to the
Canadian Fax Directory
, as he previously did, that no sales can take place in the Province of Quebec of the
Canadian Fax Directory
.
[123]
Mr. Mouyal states, and I have no reason to disbelieve him, that from the date of the second meeting, no
Quebec Fax Directory
was sold in the Province of Quebec from the offices of R.F.C. and this until July 1995. He also states he had an inventory of Quebec fax directories, which after several months, became dated and were shredded (Exhibit D-11 confirms this). In relation to the
Canadian Fax
directories, 1995 Edition (Exhibit P-18), none were sold in the Province of Quebec and that all advertising and other material for this directory (The
Official Canadian Fax Directory 1995 Edition
Exhibit P-18) was only used for sales outside of the Province of Quebec.
[124]
When asked by his counsel what he personally did to ensure the two injunctions issued against him and the numbered companies were being respected, he replied:
"A. I periodically was asked when would we be able to come work again in the Quebec market, and I told them that we were still under an injunction, and everything was status quo, absolutely nothing was to be disseminated, sold, talked about, referred to, as far as the product in the Province of Quebec -- the Quebec product in the Province of Quebec." (page 86, vol. 2, September 28, 1995 transcript)
[125]
In cross-examination, when shown Exhibit P-3, the order form for
L.T.Q.
, he states R.F.C. used this document up to August 1994, that is "prior injunction days" and not used after August 1994 "absolutely, we did not use this".
[126]
In explaining how it is that Exhibit P-3 was sent out on July 19, 1995, he states:
"A. I truly don't know, other than one piece of paper must have been just lying around somewhere somehow, and when we got back into the Quebec market someone must have picked it up and sent it out." (page 130, vol. 2, September 28, 1995 transcript)
[127]
This appears to confirm what Christine Whyte had stated.
[128]
He further went on to say that Exhibit P-3 was the order form used when he and the numbered company defendants were selling plaintiff's directory
L.T.Q.
in 1993 and possibly in 1994.
[129]
Counsel for Mouyal and his companies called Justin Pold and Charles McCulloch as witnesses. Mr. Pold is a sales manager for R.F.C. from January 1994 and Mr. McCulloch is a sales manager for R.F.C. from February 1994.
[130]
Mr. Pold states that to August 1994, R.F.C. sold, in the Province of Quebec, the
Canadian Fax Directory
, the
Quebec Fax Directory
and the
U.S. Fax Directory
. In August 1994, Mr. Mouyal called a meeting attended by Mike Mouyal, then controller Richard Myrtle, Rick Aquino, customer service, Charles McCulloch and the witness. At the meeting, Mr. Pold and the others were told by Al Mouyal that they could no longer sell the
Quebec Fax Directory
in Quebec. "As simple as that. We could not sell the
Quebec Fax Directory
, l'
Annuaire Officiel du Télécopieur du Québec
in -- anywhere in Quebec".
[131]
As a result of this meeting, Pold, with McCulloch, called a staff meeting and "told them we could not sell --- the
Quebec Fax Directory
in Quebec and we were to have all of the material that related to that product in our hands".
[132]
All of this material was held in the Manager's office.
[133]
Mr. Pold states and confirmed by Mr. McCulloch, that as of August 1994 no
Quebec Fax Directory
was sold in the Province of Quebec by any employee of R.F.C. (at least to July 1995) nor was an invoice sent for such a sale nor was any advertising material relating to the
Quebec Fax Directory
ever sent out. He also states that approximately "three weeks to a month later" a second meeting took place attended by the same persons where those attending the meeting were told that "we could not sell any products in Quebec, except the
United States Fax Directory
".
[134]
This meant that the
Official Canadian Fax Directory
, Exhibit P-18, could not be sold in Quebec.
[135]
As a result, all material, etc. was removed from the selling area and the selling staff were instructed as was previously done.
[136]
With regard to the
Official Canadian Fax Directory
, this directory was continually sold outside the Province of Quebec.
[137]
Mr. Pold states that in mid-July 1995, R.F.C. commenced to sell Exhibit P-5 in Quebec. That up to that time, the sales staff would be told (new and old) that no sales of the
Quebec Fax Directory
nor the
Canadian Fax Directory
could be sold in Quebec.
[138]
Mr. Pold gave evidence that it was the sales managers' responsibility to provide "sales leads" to those doing the selling. These were "generally computer generated cards which we generate from our database. Sales lead cards they're called" (see Exhibit D-8). The information on the card comes from Queen West on a computer disk.
[139]
When asked how these cards (Exhibit D-8) are processed, Mr. Pold states:
"Q. Now, what instructions do you give to your sales people, with respect to how these cards are to be processed by them?
A. There are two functions of the sales lead cards. The first is to verify the information on them, whether or not a sale is to be had later. The second is to try to close a sale with the sales lead card.
Q. So what would be, let's say, the normal process in terms of -- there's a phone number I see on this card?
A. A typical lead card, a sales person will take, will call up the customer, run through the information that's on the card, on the left hand side. If it's accurate, they'll just write 'okay' on the card, or if there are changes, they'll make the relevant changes in the lines provided to the right. And then they'll ask the client in question whether or not they want to acquire a copy of the directory.
Q. And what happens with the card after the call was terminated?
A. It's sent back to -- whatever the outcome of the sale is, the card is sent back to Queen West in a box that we send by courier, once a week, once every two weeks." (pages 54 and 55, September 29, 1995 transcript)
[140]
Prior to the use of "cards" (Exhibit D-8), information of potential customers would be printed on sheets of paper with 8 or 9 clients printed on each sheet of paper (Exhibit D-9) which would emanate from Queen West and what took place by the sales people with cards (Exhibit D-8) also had taken place with these sheets.
[141]
The prospect lists provided by Queen West were for the whole of Canada and were used up to November 1994. These lists were not used in the Province of Quebec from August 1994 to July 1995. In July 1995, R.F.C. copied listings from "our own directory" (Exhibit P-5) and started to sell from its own publications.
[142]
As I have said, Charles McCulloch confirmed what Mr. Pold stated in his evidence. He also states, with regard to pre-selling Exhibit P-5:
"Q. Of 1995. When you started selling it, did you have the book available? Was it in your company's possession at the time, or were you doing pre-selling?
A. It was in our company's possession. And in fact, that was an issue which came up between me and my other manager, and Al Mouyal, as to whether we would sell those ahead of time. And given the sensitive issues at stake, we waited until they were in the house, in our shipping facility, before we began selling them." (page 79, September 29, 1995 transcript)
[143]
Ricardo Aquino, Margery Brown and Denis Gobeil were called as witnesses. All these individuals attended the two meetings called by Al Mouyal. Mr. Aquino is the customer service representative at R.F.C. and this, continuously from March 1993. He confirmed that he and the others at the August 1994 meeting (first meeting) were told that they could not sell the
Quebec Fax Directory
in the Province of Quebec. As a result, he informed the six persons in his department of this information, that is, if "any customers calling to place an order for the
Quebec Directory
to be sold in Quebec, we were to tell them that we did not have the right to sell them".
[144]
Mr. Aquino also confirms a second meeting took place approximately two to three weeks after the first meeting at which the above same individuals attended. At this meeting, Mr. Aquino states they were told they could no longer sell the
Official Canadian Fax Directory
in the Province of Quebec.
[145]
Mr. Aquino, as do the others, states that from the date of the above mentioned meetings "until today" neither the
L.T.Q.
(Exhibit P-16) nor the
Official Canadian Fax Directory
(Exhibit P-18) were sold in the Province of Quebec. The
L.T.Q.
was not sold in Canada as of the August 1994 meeting.
[146]
Margery Brown is a sales, collection and verification person at R.F.C., employed by R.F.C. for approximately three years. Her function, as a "verification person" is to "receive the orders, phone customers back to make sure the information on the order is correct" and then process the order.
[147]
This witness confirms what was stated by Mr. Aquino with regard to the meetings and what took place relating to sales of Exhibits P-16 and P-18. She also states that, after the previously described meetings, the staff were not permitted to process any orders for the
Quebec Fax Directory
or for the
Official Canadian Fax Directory
in the Province of Quebec. She also confirms that as of July 1995, R.F.C. began to sell and she began to verify orders for Exhibit P-5.
[148]
In cross-examination, Ms. Brown states she was not permitted to sell the
Quebec Fax Directory
in any part of Canada and this from August 1994.
[149]
Denis Gobeil presently acts as a collection agent to R.F.C. In August 1994, he was "shipping manager" at R.F.C. and remained in that position to June 1995. His duties included "inventory control, distribution and receiving of goods". Mr. Gobeil states that as of August 1994 he was told to stop the distribution of the
L.T.Q.
(Exhibit P-16). He also states that shortly after receiving these instructions he was also told to stop distributing the
Official Canadian Fax Directory 1995
(Exhibit P-18) in the Province of Quebec.
[150]
With regard to the inventory of Exhibit P-16 left after the issuance of the first injunction, Mr. Gobeil states the books were "set aside and made so that we could not touch them" under "lock and key" and eventually destroyed. (This fact is confirmed by Exhibit D-11).
[151]
The defendant Ian Anthony Richardson gave evidence for both himself and Queen West Publishing (Q.W.). Mr. Richardson is President of Q.W.
[152]
Q.W. published l'
Annuaire Officiel Canadien des Télécopieurs Édition du Québec 1995/1996
filed as Exhibit P-5 and hereinafter referred to as Exhibit P-5. Q.W. also published Exhibit P-18, the
Official Canadian Fax Directory 1995 Edition
.
[153]
Mr. Richardson's function at Q.W. is, as he states, to oversee the operation, he is involved in the planning of all products, with the collection of data, he looks after in-house graphics and computer ends of production and liaison with outside companies doing work for and with Q.W. such as R.F.C. "which is really the distribution side of things". He also states that R.F.C. does Q.W.'s verification.
[154]
In trying to explain what "data collection" meant, Mr. Richardson, after many questions and what one can consider to be answers finally states that it is the gathering of data and information. This means that Q.W. bought listings from, for example, Fax Research Group who are "in the fax broadcasting business".
[155]
He also states he initiated a program to collect data from "other available sources" such as by doing "a mailing" to chambers of commerce. He would collect all other types of publications. "We would buy telephone directories ... get business directories".
[156]
In effect, what Mr. Richardson states is that data for his fax directories were either purchased or taken from other published directories and that, after six months of commencing business Q.W. had approximately 150,000 listings obtained from the various sources stored at Fax Research Group.
[157]
With regard to the
Official Quebec Fax Directory
(Exhibit P-8), the last edition of this directory was published in 1994/1995 and was prohibited from being sold pursuant to an injunction (August 1994). Q.W. also publishes the
Official Canadian Fax Directory
and did a 1994 edition, a 1995 edition and a 1995/96 edition. The 1995 edition is "under injunction".
[158]
Mr. Richardson states that an example of such a publication that serves as a source for data is the
Montreal International Sports Exhibition
directory (
M.I.S.E.
show directory, Exhibit D-10) where companies are listed with information such as address, postal code, fax number, phone number and generally what the company does. Mr. Richardson then states, as to what he does with the information:
"Q. How many pages are there in this book?
A. Two hundred and thirty, two hundred and thirty-two pages of material, about the show and listings et cetera, advertisements, et cetera. Now, what we will do with this particular directory, or what I will do with it, if it -- in a lot of cases it is me who does this, I will take this, go down and isolate which particular listings of the ones that are in here, that we want to process into -- to form data out of. So I will go through this, and I will put -- what we use is an industrial type classification, originating from a SIC code situation, which is the Standard Industrial Code, which Canada uses. I take this data, and use it -- generally follow that particular SIC code ruling, or number system, and I will number those in here, and identify which ones there are, and then take this to be processed." (pages 151 and 152, September 29, 1995 transcript)
and at pages 154, 155 and 156, of this transcript, Mr. Richardson states:
"Q. Was this part of the analysis you went through to determine which were to be retained or not?
A. Well, certainly everything is looked at, because you're looking at doing a coding of the particular thing. What you have in this type of a situation where you have a -- you have a write-up on this particular company that sits there, and it tells you what type of business they're in. And of course, to follow that through, to put an industrial code on it, you will have to read what type of business they're in, and put that industrial code on it. So, you have a qualification that you do when you go through it, and for certain reasons, there'd be reasons why you wouldn't have some things in here. They're not, maybe, in the area of which you're working in. And this one here, you also have one type of a -- you also have some that are crossed out, but they're crossed out because when this directory came out, the date that this went into production, because it's a bigger project, there was corrections, or items, or company changes, and things like that. So when you go to the show, for instance, and get this, you have a correction form that is given to you with the directory, and you have to go in and make these little changes yourself, within that show directory. That's why you'll see a number of them are crossed out, and a new name change written into them. That's because you've got a supplement portion to that particular directory. That's part of what you do. Just in that instance, or as I'm showing you, in this instance, it's a little different. In other directories, you may, because they're not an area that you're looking at right now, or they don't contain information that you want, or you might write information in, but I think I'm getting a little too far here with that. And then what I do with that particular publication is I will take it, and it will go into process at the office to be handled."
[159]
In effect, what happens is the information contained in a directory such as Exhibit D-10 is analyzed, corrected and put into Q.W.'s database.
[160]
As Mr. Richardson states, Q.W. processes half a million or three quarters of a million listings (data) obtained from directories of various kinds, yellow page books and industry specific publications.
[161]
A listing generally contains a company name, an I.D. number, an address, a postal code, a street number, a fax number, a telephone number and an 800 number.
[162]
Another directory used by Mr. Richardson to gather data is the
Bell Quebec Gatineau/Hull/Ottawa Directory
for 1994-1995. Mr. Richardson explained how he used this directory to gather fax numbers and 800 numbers. He states he went through each business listing.
[163]
Another publication used to gather listings is the
1994 Canadian Insurance Claims Directory
where Mr. Richardson would go through the same process to gather information he required, put it into Q.W.'s database and used it, if required, in one of Q.W.'s fax directories.
[164]
Mr. Richardson explained that the listing in one source can usually be found in another source, e.g., a listing of a construction company in a Bell telephone book may also be found in a construction directory.
[165]
As for sources, Richardson states he gets "a lot of subscription lists, trade publications, magazines, travel guides and other such productions".
[166]
In effect, what I understand is that Q.W., Richardson, compiles a listing of fax numbers, addresses, standard industrial codes, etc. by copying them from different sources, that is, they may look at a number of different sources to obtain all the information for a particular listing needed to put into one of Q.W.'s directories. The sources would be paper sources, trade publications, etc., and "electronic" sources such as "Scott's Selectory, various provincial government disks ... and there is BOSS Online ... BOSS Online is a government --- main ones are the manufacturing directory ... is an arm of the Federal Government".
[167]
An example of an electronic source is Exhibit D-16 Pro CD Fax Book 1995.
[168]
The information obtained for a particular listing is then verified and put into one of Q.W.'s directories.
[169]
When asked about the preparation of Exhibit P-5, he states he knew he had to have completely newly sourced information "we had to have new sourced information in the directory, independently sourced information". Mr. Richardson states:
"I oversaw the whole operation. I requested information and statistics and reviewed these. I did spot checks on the information and the reports and I took specific special areas under my control." (page 19, October 2, 1995 transcript)
[170]
In overseeing and doing the work, he instructed his assistant, Wendy Hewitt, to "dump or remove the Marcus information (these are the listings resulting in the injunction being issued) and to clean up all questionable data .. and ensure that there was a source for all data that went into the directory, an independent source for it".
[171]
Mr. Richardson states he knew what listings came from the Marcus list because "there is a source field in the database (Q.W. database) and it would be marked in there as Marcus".
[172]
In speaking of the Marcus list, as it was in Q.W.'s database, Richardson states, it was "totally clean, wiped right out of it".
[173]
In speaking of Exhibit P-5, Mr. Richardson states that all the data contained in this directory had a new source for each separate listing (new source meaning other than the Marcus list).
[174]
As the source for the construction industry of Quebec, Richardson states he used the
Annuaire Téléphonique de la Construction du Québec
(Exhibit D-17). He states he would use only those listings "we wanted to focus on" and kept those that were new to Q.W. database. That is, if the listing was already in his database and no change was required, he would not put in another of the same listing even if the "old listing" was in the new source, such as Exhibit D-17. As he states, it would be redundant.
[175]
In comparing the construction listings in Exhibits P-5 and P-18, it appears that substantial changes did take place (see pages 44 to 48 of October 2, 1995 transcript for the changes).
[176]
As the source used for Exhibit P-5, for the caisses populaires part of the book, Exhibits D-18 and D-19 were used. Exhibit D-18 is
Répertoire des Caisses Populaires et des Caisses D'Économie 1991
and
Canadian Payments Association Directory
, vol. 2 1994.
[177]
In comparing the changes from Exhibits P-18 and P-5, see pages 53 to 57 of the October 2, 1995 transcript. I am satisfied the changes are substantial.
[178]
Mr. Richardson states that none of the information contained in the construction and caisse populaire sections in Exhibit P-5 came from Tamec listings and they had an entirely independent source.
[179]
In replacing or removing the "Marcus list" Mr. Richardson states that this was done by finding different sources for these listings.
[180]
This indicates to me that what Q.W. did was to no longer use the Marcus list as the source but went to a different source, e.g., Exhibits D-17 or D-18 or D-19, and source that same listing.
[181]
I see nothing in doing this that would contravene the injunction issued against Q.W. and Richardson.
[182]
As Richardson states:
"Q. So, in order to produce the Canadian P-5 that you have in front of you, you proceeded to remove the Marcus List and substitute these approximately eleven thousand (11,000) names in preparation of P-5, is that correct sir?
A. There was no intention of substituting, you just do your work to -- I am not trying to replace eleven thousand (11,000) with eleven thousand (11,000). I'm just trying to look at new areas -- look at the areas and put new information in." (page 64, October 2, 1995 transcript)
[183]
In continuing to discuss the Marcus list and those listings that were questionable as a result of the injunctions, Richardson said he would only use the listing if he found "an alternate valid source that I accepted" and that this applied to all of the Quebec listings found in Exhibit P-18.
[184]
Wendy Hewitt, database manager at Q.W., was called as a witness by counsel for Q.W. and Richardson.
[185]
At the commencement of the hearing of the show cause order, counsel for plaintiff asked for the exclusion of all witnesses. Ms. Hewitt remained in the courtroom during all of the hearing. When Ms. Hewitt was called as a witness, she gave as her occupation database manager. Ms. Hewitt is an employee of Q.W.
[186]
I asked counsel for Richardson and Q.W. why Ms. Hewitt remained in the courtroom after witnesses were excluded. He informed me that she was the representative of Q.W. It was not the President of Q.W. who is the representative (Richardson) but an employee who is the representative of Q.W.
[187]
I am satisfied that what counsel did was an attempt to find an excuse, a weak one I may say, to keep Ms. Hewitt in the courtroom to hear what Mr. Richardson had to say regarding the operations relating to Q.W.'s database and what was done with the "Marcus list". This should not have been done.
[188]
Before being employed by Q.W., Ms. Hewitt began working as a "data entry person" in 1988 and then "moved up" into a database administrator. She began to work for Q.W. in March 1994. At Q.W. she coordinates the entry of the updates and new records. As she states "I coordinate anything that really has to do with the database, being from concept to actuality".
[189]
She states that Q.W.'s database contains approximately 216,000 to 217,000 listings nationally and that these listings are used for Q.W.'s publications. There are a number of "fields", information kept for each listing. This information is obtained from different sources of data and when information is so obtained, it is compared with what is already in Q.W.'s database. As she states "there are also updates that come from the Montreal distribution office and electronic disks that are purchased".
[190]
Ms. Hewitt states the information that is obtained from various sources is put into an "electronic format", is then "auto merged" (done by computer), that is, the computer "will take over database (Q.W.) and compare it to the electronic data -- just keyed in". She goes on to state:
"If the telephone number, the fax number or the company name are the same, it will not add the listing. If they are different, all three (3) are different, it can add the listing to the bottom of the database with the source as we have identified whatever we happen to be using. The ones that do match something are looked at one (1) by one (1). You have a screen that will come up that shows on one side what is in our database; and then on the other side, what is from this new source and you will look down the name, the division, all the fields you look at separately, you are not really doing it as a whole. And if you have better information -- if one of them has a division and one doesn't, you can take the division or decide to remove the division depending on which information was more current. The same with the address, if it seems that have moved suite numbers, you will just take the new suite, things like that." (pages 114 and 115, October 2, 1995 transcript)
[191]
In discussing the issue of verification of listings, she states the Montreal Distribution office verifies between 150,000 to 200,000 listings per year. This verification brings the information in the database "up to date".
[192]
When asked about the "Marcus list", she explained how it was incorporated into Q.W. database (in the same manner as above stated) that is, by the computer "merging" the information. If the information is already in the Q.W. database it is not reentered but if something different is found, e.g., different telephone or fax number, it is considered a new listing with the source marked as "Marcus".
[193]
Listings are always being updated from verification performed in Montreal, from electronic lists, etc. In late 1994, Mr. Richardson told Ms. Hewitt that the "Marcus list" would have to be removed and all the data would have to be updated. She states that in early 1995 the "Marcus list" was removed from the Q.W. database, that is, all listings with a "Marcus" source as well as any other listing that did not have an identifiable source was also removed. This removed approximately 10,000 Quebec listings.
[194]
Ms. Hewitt, when shown Exhibit P-13, the list prepared by Mr. Lafontaine of 17 listings allegedly copied from the
L.T.Q.
, Ms. Hewitt produced Exhibit D-20 en liasse for 16 of the said listings, #12 being omitted, to show that a new source, other than the Marcus list, was found.
[195]
She basically states that the listing was either sent for verification to Q.W.'s distributor to verify or a new source was found by Mr. Richardson for the caisse populaires and construction companies (see pages 133 to 142, October 2, 1995 transcript).
[196]
In speaking of listings 8 to 17 on Exhibit D-20, Ms. Hewitt states that these listings were verified by R.F.C. and the meaning of "OK'd as is" means the information that was on the information sheet sent to Montreal for verification was correct.
[197]
In cross-examination, Ms. Hewitt clearly states that every listing that had a Marcus source was deleted and if I understand her evidence, this was done by finding another source for the listing and, proceeding with the previously explained merging process, entered the listing with all necessary changes.
[198]
I believe it important to reproduce what Ms. Hewitt did relating to the Marcus list as a result of questions put to her by the court as this clearly explains why I am satisfied that a new source was found for every listing found in the Marcus list, notwithstanding the fact that there was a carry over such as an "s" missing from Construction Belisle René Inc., Les or the error in the street name for Caisse Populaire de St-Étienne-de-Lauzon, that is, Lagneux instead of Lagueux.
"Q. Miss Hewitt, did I understand your evidence to be that someone told you to delete from your database the Marcus entries?
A. Tony and I discussed, yes, deleting things with the Marcus source.
Q. Alright. When did you discuss with Mr. Richardson -- since I'm not familiar with 'Tony' so, I'll use 'Mr. Richardson'. When did you discuss with Mr. Richardson deleting the listings with the Marcus source, please, for the first time, if you can tell me. I don't want the day, just when?
A. Oh, late ninety-four ('94).
Q. Late ninety-four ('94). When you say late ninety-four ('94), I don't want to pin you down but when you say late ninety-four ('94), you are talking about November, December, or are you talking about October, November, December, September, October, November, December?
A. I believe we first started discussing it in November.
Q. What did you discuss?
A. We discussed that the legal proceedings had to do with the Marcus List, so, we would not want any information in our database that's source related back to the Marcus List in any way, or our use of the source.
Q. Alright. So, you discussed it and then what did you do after the discussion?
A. We were working on other things at the time so, we didn't -- I didn't actually take them out until early ninety-five ('95).
Q. Well, that is not what I asked you. Just listen carefully. You had your discussion, what did you do after the discussion? Now, 'after' doesn't mean the day after or five (5) minutes after the discussion. I want to know if you did anything, did you in fact do anything as a result of your discussion with Mr. Richardson?
A. Yes.
Q. When was it that you did whatever you did?
A. In early ninety-five ('95), February-ish, March maybe.
Q. What did you do?
A. I removed any listing that had been originally added from the Marcus.
Q. Just a minute, you removed any listing that what?
A. Had been added from the Marcus List, or if it had been an update and it still reflected Marcus, so nothing else had come along after it, it was removed. But if it had been ...
Q. Just a minute.
A. Sorry.
Q. Yes?
A. But, if it had been in the database and then the Marcus came along and then another independent source came along after that, it was kept.
Q. Alright. But if it had been in the database and then Marcus came along and then it was updated ...
A. And then something else came along after that.
Q. To update it?
A. Yes.
Q. Alright.
A. There is more.
Q. Please.
A. Besides the Marcus, we also did remove any listings that we couldn't -- I didn't know what the source was, I couldn't identify it. There had been ...
Q. Just a minute.
A. Sorry.
Q. Yes, you removed any listing that you didn't know what the source was?
A. Yes, there was batches of consecutive listings with a lot of typos and things, so we just got rid of those. And that is where it ended up about twenty thousand (20,000) nationally were deleted with the over fifty percent (50%) being in Quebec." (pages 174 to 177, October 2, 1995 transcript)
[199]
The above clearly explains how and why and when the Marcus list was deleted from the Q.W. database.
Discussion And Conclusion
[200]
As I have stated, in contempt of court proceedings, the evidence must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the persons charged with contempt have breached the terms of the injunction. On pages 4 and 5 of these reasons, I state what are the "offences" charged against the defendants.
[201]
R.F.C. (and related numbered companies) as well as Albert and Michael Mouyal, are charged with having made representations letting believe that they are related with plaintiff and of offering to sell the
Official Canadian Fax Directory
and selling this directory in the Province of Quebec.
[202]
I am not satisfied that the evidence submitted by the plaintiff is of such a nature as to convince me, beyond a reasonable doubt, that this in fact occurred.
[203]
In fact, I am satisfied from the evidence, which I have summarized, that R.F.C. et al. have not made representations to persons in the Province of Quebec that they are selling the
L.T.Q.
nor that they represent Tamec.
[204]
I come to this conclusion not only from the evidence of defendants' witnesses, but from the evidence of plaintiff's witnesses.
[205]
Ms. Brochu's evidence was contradicted by plaintiff's witnesses Fouad Saad (also known as Daniel Roy) and by Christine Whyte.
[206]
Ms. Brochu had, as I have said, stated she was called by Daniel Roy who said he represented
L.T.Q.
She also states she heard from Christine Whyte.
[207]
Plaintiff's witness Fouad Saad (Daniel Roy) contradicts the evidence given by Ms. Brochu. He states, and I have no reason to disbelieve him, that in all his attempts to make sales for R.F.C. he uses the same sales presentation and speaks of l'
Annuaire Officiel Canadien des Télécopieurs Edition Spéciale pour le Québec
.
[208]
Even if I accept the evidence of Ms. Brochu as it was given and I accept the evidence given by Fouad Saad, then the evidence is contradictory and thus not proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
[209]
With regard to the evidence of Christine Whyte, I accept her evidence that it was "by accident" that Exhibit P-3 was sent to Ms. Brochu. I also am satisfied that when Ms. Whyte sent out P-3, she sent Exhibit P-4, the information sheet and it clearly shows what directories are sold by R.F.C.
[210]
As to the evidence of Ms. Perron, her evidence was contradicted by Laurie Wexler also called by plaintiff.
[211]
If I accept the testimony of both Ms. Perron and Ms. Wexler as correct, I cannot conclude, beyond a reasonable doubt, that Ms. Wexler attempted to sell or represented herself as a sales person for
L.T.Q.
or Tamec.
[212]
In addition, the evidence of Ms. Perron indicates to me that when Ms. Wexler called, particularly during the second conversation (pages 71 and 72, vol. 1, September 27, 1995 transcript), there was no mention of the
L.T.Q.
but only mention of R.F.C.'s directory.
[213]
Therefore, I am satisfied that the evidence presented by the plaintiff relating to R.F.C., the numbered companies and the two Mouyals do not convince me beyond a reasonable doubt that they contravened the terms of the injunction.
[214]
Insofar as the evidence of Mr. Lafontaine with regard to the fact that some of the listings (Exhibit P-13) found in Exhibit P-5 have the same error as was found in the plaintiff's directory,
L.T.Q.
, or as was found in the Marcus list, I am not convinced, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the source for those listings is plaintiff's
L.T.Q.
or the Marcus list.
[215]
I accept, without any hesitation, the evidence of Mr. Richardson and Ms. Hewitt. I am satisfied that before Exhibit P-5 went to press, Mr. Richardson directed Ms. Hewitt to remove all listings in Q.W.'s database that emanated from the Marcus list. That is, he instructed her that no listing found in Q.W.'s database can be used unless a new and/or different source for the listing was found.
[216]
Mr. Richardson and Ms. Hewitt both explained how different sources were found for all of the listings in Q.W.'s database that came from plaintiff's directory (or the Marcus list). I accept the explanation of Ms. Hewitt as to why some of the same errors found in the
L.T.Q.
are found in Exhibit P-5, that is, when the computer was "merging" the information from the new source and because the street was the same or an "s" was missing, it was not "caught" by the computer.
[217]
The injunction forbids the defendants from using plaintiff's work as a source for its listings, it does not forbid the defendants from copying listings from other sources.
[218]
The evidence as presented to me clearly indicates that a new and different source was found for each of the listings that may have been copied from plaintiff, directly or indirectly.
[219]
Even if I were to accept all of the testimony of each witness that appeared before me, I have no choice but to dismiss the present application, in that, I could not say that plaintiff discharged its very heavy burden of proving, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the defendants contravened the terms of the injunction.
[220]
In that I have come to the above conclusion, I do not have to decide the issue of "degrees" of mens rea needed or not needed before one can be found to have contravened the terms of the injunction. This issue was raised by Q.W.'s counsel.
[221]
I need only say that mens rea need not be proven before a defendant, in this case, be found to have contravened the terms of the injunction. If there is a contravention of the terms of the injunction, the person to whom it was addressed is in contempt, whether he purposely wanted to contravene the terms or not.
[222]
I would also say that I have attempted to review, in detail, all of the evidence presented to me. The hearing lasted six days. There is a strong possibility that I did not mention every bit of evidence presented. This does not mean I failed to consider the evidence or testimony presented to me.
[223]
For the above reasons, the application is denied with costs in favour of defendants. In that the hearing against all defendants took place at the same time, there shall only be one hearing fee to be divided equally between R.F.C. and Q.W.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/clh
[End of document]
