[33]
In determining the proper approach to be taken in applying the rights in the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
("
Charter
") in the immigration context, I stated as follows at pp. 690 to 691 [F.C.]:
"With respect to the second stage of the s. 7
Charter
analysis, the principles to be applied in determining whether a statutory scheme violates the principles of fundamental justice were enunciated by Sopinka, J., in
Chiarelli v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration)
, [1992] 1 S.C.R. 711. In considering the constitutionality of previous legislation governing the deportation of permanent residents convicted of certain criminal offences, Sopinka, J., confirmed the importance of adopting a contextual approach to the interpretation of s. 7 of the
Charter
. In this regard, he stated as follows, at pp. 733-734:
'Thus in determining the scope of principles of fundamental justice as they apply to this case, the court must look to the principles and policies underlying immigration law. The most fundamental principle of immigration law is that non-citizens do not have an unqualified right to enter or remain in the country. At common law an alien has no right to enter or remain in the country.
. . . . .
'The distinction between citizens and non-citizens is recognized in the
Charter
. While permanent residents are given the right to move to, take up residence in, and pursue the gaining of a livelihood in any province in s. 6(2), only citizens are accorded the right "to enter, remain in and leave in Canada" in s. 6(1).
'Thus Parliament has the right to adopt an immigration policy and to enact legislation prescribing the conditions under which non-citizens will be permitted to enter and remain in Canada. It has done so in the
Immigration Act
.'
"In my opinion, these words of Sopinka, J., are directly applicable to the case at bar. Accordingly, I have concluded that the constitutional validity of s. 40.1 of the
Immigration Act
must be analysed in the context of 'the principles and policies underlying immigration law.' Furthermore, I note that proceedings under s. 40.1 of the
Immigration Act
are directed solely to determining the reasonableness of the ministerial certification of inadmissibility. This question is purely and simply an immigration matter."