[1]
Gibson, J.
: These reasons relate to an application for leave and for judicial review filed 11 January 1996, seeking review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration (the "respondent") pursuant to s. 70(5) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, as amended (hereinafter, the "
Act
"), that the respondent is of the opinion that the applicant constitutes a danger to the public in Canada. This decision is dated 29 December 1995.
Background
[2]
The applicant is a citizen of Jamaica, who came to Canada on 16 July 1980, and was granted status as a landed immigrant. He settled first in Montréal, and subsequently moved to Ottawa. In 1985, the applicant incurred two convictions for theft under $200. The applicant has two teenage children who reside in Canada; their mother resides in Jamaica. The applicant was lately the sole caregiver to his children until he was removed from Canada. His children now apparently reside with the applicant's relatives in Montréal.
[3]
In January 1991, the applicant was charged with sexual interference under s. 151 of the
Criminal Code of Canada
, [see footnote 1] and was convicted on 2 March 1992 and sentenced to a term of imprisonment of two years less a day, to be followed by a two year period of probation. An appeal to the Ontario Court of Appeal was dismissed. (18 November 1993) File No. C13474 (Ont. C.A.) per Grange, J.A.) The offence involved sexual intercourse with a thirteen year old neighbour of the applicant's, who had sought the assistance of the applicant and his wife when she was having difficulty with her home situation. In his sentencing reasons, Beaulieu, P.C.J., characterized the offence as follows:
"It is a case of seduction and manipulation on the part of the accused and it is a situation of the accused using his position as an adult in such a manner that he was able to seduce and take advantage of a young victim who until that stage in terms of the sexual desire referred to in the one case in particular - that situation and those interests were on the facts of this case virtually foreign to her before the accused's entry upon the scene.
"On the positive side with respect to the accused, I have taken into consideration that this is not a case of
loco parentis. It is not a situation in which there was the use of alcohol or drugs to numb the sense of appreciation of the victim. There was no overt violence or violence or threats. There was, as I have indicated, not
loco parentis nor indeed a situation of a person being in a position of trust as is normally understood."
The applicant was released on parole supervision on 29 June 1994. Under a condition of his release, he was examined at the Royal Ottawa Hospital for tendencies toward paedophilia; the result showed the applicant to have a "low level of arousal" in all areas.
[4]
By letter dated 26 October 1995, the applicant was informed of the possible issuance of a Ministerial Opinion pursuant to s. 70(5) of the
Act
. Submissions were invited, and were made by counsel for the applicant. The opinion that ensued, that the respondent was of the opinion that the applicant constituted a danger to the public in Canada, was dated 29 December 1995. A warrant for the applicant's arrest was executed on 4 January 1996, and he was detained. A deportation order issued on 9 January 1996 after an inquiry, in which it was determined that the applicant was a person described in s. 27(1)(d) of the
Act
.
[5]
A stay of the removal of the applicant from Canada was sought on behalf of the applicant, pending the outcome of this application. By order dated 12 January 1996, the stay application was denied by McGillis, J., and the applicant was subsequently removed from Canada to his native Jamaica.
[6]
This matter came on for hearing before me on 16 July 1996. I reserved my decision at the close of the hearing and invited counsel to make written submissions regarding a case that I cited to them during the hearing, and regarding certification of a serious question of general importance. The submissions received were contained in the Applicant's Supplementary Memorandum of Argument and Book of Authorities, which proposes a two part question for certification, and the respondent's further submissions.
The Relevant Legislation
[7]
Pursuant to s. 70(1) of the
Act
, a permanent resident has a right to appeal the issuance of a deportation order to the Appeal Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board; the filing of an appeal of this nature stays the execution of the deportation order pending determination of the appeal. Section 70(5) was enacted by s. 13(3) of
An Act to amend the Immigration Act and the Citizenship Act and to make a consequential amendment to the Customs Act
(S.C. 1995, c. 15, in force 10 July 1995), and provides:
"(5) No appeal may be made to the Appeal Division by a person described in subs. (1) or paragraph (2)(a) or (b) against whom a deportation order or conditional deportation order is made where the Minister is of the opinion that the person constitutes a danger to the public in Canada and the person has been determined by an adjudicator to be
(a) a member of an inadmissible class described in paragraph 19(1)(c), (c.1), (c.2) or (d);
(b) a person described in paragraph 27(1)(a.1); or
(c) a person described in paragraph 27(1)(d) who has been convicted of an offence under any Act of Parliament for which a term of imprisonment of ten years or more may be imposed."
The "danger opinion" provided for in s. 70(5) functions in a similar way to similar opinions provided for in other provisions of the
Act
which mandate certain consequences of the Minister forming the opinion that a person constitutes a danger to the public in Canada. Section 70(5) removes the right to appeal a deportation order to the Appeal Division where there is a "danger opinion" and the person is determined to be criminally inadmissible to Canada.
The Issues
[8]
Counsel for the applicant raised the following specific issue in his materials:
"In respect of this particular application, the issue raised is whether on the evidence before the respondent Minister relating to the applicant, was it reasonable to conclude that the applicant 'constitutes a danger to the public in Canada'?"
In the context of this issue, counsel for the applicant submitted that in determining the "reasonableness" of the decision under review, regard could be had to certain objective criteria, some of which could be found elsewhere in the
Act
, or in other legislative provisions dealing with "danger to the public".
[9]
Counsel for the respondent submitted that there were two issues: the threshold for judicial review of a ministerial opinion formed pursuant to s. 70(5), and whether the respondent's decision herein constituted a reviewable error of fact. It was common ground between the parties that the two theft convictions in 1985 were not pertinent to the respondent's decision in this case.
[10]
No argument was presented regarding the sufficiency of procedural safeguards taken in the formation of the opinion, nor were any constitutional arguments regarding the validity of s. 70(5) presented at the hearing. In the applicant's supplementary memorandum of argument, counsel for the applicant raised a constitutional issue regarding the standards against which a legislative provision should be measured for a determination as to vagueness. Since my invitation to make further submissions was with regard to the two issues noted above, and since there was no notice of a constitutional question that I am aware of, nor opportunity for counsel for the respondent to orally address this issue, I will not deal with it.
Analysis
Standard Of Review
[11]
Counsel for the respondent submitted that this court should review opinions of the respondent with regard to danger to the public with great deference, in light of the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in
Nguyen v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
(1993), 151 N.R. 69; 18 Imm. L.R.(2d) 165 (F.C.A.). That decision related to s. 46.01(1) of the
Act
, another provision that contemplates "danger opinions", in relation to persons whose right to have their claim to Convention refugee status adjudicated is taken away by the combination of a danger opinion and criminal inadmissibility to Canada. In that decision, Marceau, J.A., found:
"... it is argued that the absence of legislative safeguards to protect against the issuance of an ill-advised certificate, such as a requirement that dangerous conduct be likely to continue and that the dangerousness be intractable, coupled with the fact that there is no provision for a court review of the Minister's opinion, renders the whole legislative scheme disrespectful to principles of fundamental justice. I disagree. I do not believe that the Minister needs to be compelled to follow formal guidelines as to the factors he should take into account in forming his opinion, and I consider the Minister's opinion in respect of public danger as reliable as that of a court."
Counsel for the respondent asserted that in light of this statement, and the fact that s. 70(5) also deals with danger opinions, much deference was owed to the decision under review.
[12]
Counsel for the applicant agreed that s. 70(5) gives a discretionary power to the respondent, and that where a decision under the subsection could be shown to be a reasonable conclusion in regard to the totality of the evidence, the court should not intervene, even if it would have come to a different conclusion. However, he argued that the decision in
Nguyen
was limited by its context, which was a challenge to the constitutionality of the legislative provisions there under review, and that it was not a statement regarding the authority and jurisdiction of the court to review decisions made pursuant to the provisions, or as to the degree of deference to be accorded such opinions. Indeed, counsel for the applicant emphasized that the court in
Nguyen
confirmed the jurisdiction of the court to review such decisions.
[13]
I am satisfied that the decision in
Nguyen
, stating as it did that a decision by the Minister as to public danger was "as reliable as that of a court", was not intended to limit the jurisdiction of this court to review such an opinion, but was a confirmation of the constitutionality of a legislative scheme without formal guidelines for the respondent to consider. I am satisfied that it was also meant as an endorsement of the discretionary nature of such an opinion. I do not read the decision in
Nguyen
as impinging on the authority of this court to grant relief where it is satisfied that the respondent, acting pursuant to a danger opinion provision, has committed one or more of the classes of error enumerated in s. 18.1(4) of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, as amended.
[14]
I consider the nature of the respondent's decision-making power in s. 70(5) to be broadly discretionary. The language of "opinion" clearly denotes a legislative intent to provide the respondent Minister with a wide discretion to determine "danger to the public in Canada". Considering the discretionary nature of the decision under review, I am guided by the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in
Shah v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
(1994), 170 N.R. 238 (F.C.A.), where Hugessen, J.A., noted with respect to the burden on an applicant to demonstrate an error in the exercise of a discretion:
"To succeed in his attack here the applicant must show that the decision-maker erred in law, proceeded on some wrong or improper principle or acted in bad faith. It is a heavy burden ..."
I adopt the dicta of Hugessen, J.A., as it relates to this application. I consider the reviewability of this decision to be contingent on counsel for the applicant establishing that the decision-maker erred in law, acted in bad faith, or proceeded on a wrong principle. As Hugessen, J.A., noted, the burden on the applicant is a heavy one.
The Meaning Of "Danger To The
Public"
[15]
Counsel for the applicant argued that in order for there to be some meaning attached to the words "danger to the public in Canada", there must be some risk of future danger, or proclivity toward violence, so that a person constituting a danger to the public must be shown to present a real risk of harm to the Canadian public, at present or in the future.
[16]
He argued that a conviction for a serious offence, alone, should not be a sufficient basis for a danger opinion. Counsel cited
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
It bears noting that this decision was made in a different context, that of review of an adjudicator's decision made under s. 103 of the
Act
, where the test is "likely to pose a danger to the public".
[17]
Counsel submitted that the scheme of the
Act
itself gives support for the position that a conviction alone is not sufficient to ground a danger opinion, since there are two requirements under the subsection that must be met for an appeal right to be removed: the individual must have been convicted of a serious offence
and
must be found to be a danger to the public. There is in place, mandatory removal of landed persons who have been convicted of serious offences, but such persons have a right to appeal the deportation order before removal. Section 70(5) removes that right to appeal for only certain of those persons, those who are the subject of danger opinions. If Parliament intended that a conviction for a serious offence alone grounded a danger opinion, then there would be no need for a determination of opinion by the respondent. Counsel argued that to give meaning to both requirements, the danger opinion must be founded on something more than a conviction alone.
[18]
Counsel for the respondent emphasized the fact that the Court of Appeal in
Nguyen
explicitly found no need for formal guidelines for the respondent to follow in making decisions pursuant to the danger provision in s. 46.01(1) of the
Act
; therefore it would be wrong to impose any criteria on the respondent to determine a danger opinion pursuant to s. 70(5).
[19]
I am satisfied that although there may be no need to impose formal guidelines on the respondent regarding what constitutes a danger to the public, that phrase must have some meaning in itself; it must constitute more than mere duplication of the conviction for a serious offence element of the legislative scheme. I am satisfied that Parliament did not intend for danger opinions to have no meaning, and that in order for the respondent to form an opinion pursuant to s. 70(5), the fact of a conviction alone is an insufficient basis; the circumstances of each case must, over and above the conviction, indicate a danger to the public. By this, I do not wish to be taken as indicating that there is no instance where a danger opinion pursuant to s. 70(5) could be properly issued where a person has only one conviction; I simply find that there must be circumstances in the case additional to a single conviction that indicate a danger to the public. There may very well be cases where the circumstances surrounding a single conviction point to a danger to the public.
[20]
In the recent case of
Bahadori v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
(1995), 95 F.T.R. 75 (T.D.), which I brought to the attention of counsel, my colleague Wetston, J., reviewed a danger opinion formed in the context of s. 53 of the
Act
. Regarding the meaning to be attached to that danger provision, which is identical in wording to the danger provision in s. 70(5), he found:
"Whether a person constitutes a danger to the public is fact dependent. Do the facts support the finding that that person indeed constitutes a danger to the public in Canada? It is not simply a question of whether the opinion is subjective or objective. It is more a question of whether the facts support a finding that, in law, that person constitutes a danger to the public in Canada.
. . . . .
"It is the court's opinion that what is essential under this section is a determination of whether the facts support the finding that Mr. Bahadori poses
a present or future danger
to the public in Canada." (underlining added by me for emphasis)
Neither counsel viewed this decision as inconsistent with his client's position. I view the decision as indicative of the meaning to be ascribed to "danger to the public", that is, that there be a "present or future danger" to the public, a concept consistent with a conclusion that the facts of any particular case must disclose more than a single conviction in the past to support a danger opinion.
[21]
Counsel for the applicant argued that in determining the meaning to be ascribed to "danger to the public", a variety of considerations should be implied by the phrase, and these considerations could be gleaned from other provisions in the
Act
, such as the provision for detention in s. 103, and from other legislative provisions such as the bail provisions in the
Criminal Code
. In s. 70(5), Parliament chose not to narrow the scope of the respondent's discretion by a "reasonable grounds" standard or by specific factors to be considered. I am mindful of the fact that this has been considered by the Court of Appeal to indicate an intention on the part of Parliament to grant a wide discretion, and I find that it would be inappropriate, and wrong in law, to judicially impose criteria for consideration where Parliament has not. However, I am satisfied that the phrase "danger to the public" has a plain meaning, and I find that meaning to be a "present or future danger to the public". For the respondent to reach the opinion that a person constitutes a danger to the public in Canada, there must be some evidence of the person being a present or future danger to other persons in Canada.
The Evidence In This Case
[22]
Against the foregoing, I find that the respondent erred in law, in making a determination that the applicant constituted a danger to the public in Canada. I am satisfied, that on the material that was before the respondent, there was no evidence that the applicant posed a "present or future danger" to the public in Canada. The evidence disclosed that the applicant was not a paedophile; he demonstrated low sexual arousal in all areas based on testing conducted well after the events that led to his conviction. The applicant's conviction occurred nearly four years before the danger opinion, and there was no evidence of criminal activity in the interim. Throughout his dealings with police and probation officers, and with Immigration officials, the applicant was cooperative. I cannot see any basis for the issuance of the danger opinion beyond the fact of the single serious conviction and the relatively singular series of events leading to that conviction.
[23]
As stated earlier, I do not wish my conclusion on the facts of this matter to be interpreted as a finding that it would be impossible to found a danger opinion on a single serious conviction, where there is evidence on file supporting the view that a person so convicted poses a present or future danger to persons in Canada. However, there is nothing in the circumstances of this case preceding or surrounding the single conviction, or subsequent to the single conviction, to indicate that the applicant constitutes a present or future danger to the public. There is no question that by virtue of the very serious crime he committed, the applicant was quite properly subject to deportation; however, being found to constitute a danger to the public in Canada, combined with the conviction, has further implications; it removes a right of appeal to the Appeal Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board. For this to follow, in addition to the conviction, there must be evidence of present or future danger.
Conclusion
[24]
Based on the foregoing analysis and reasons, this application is allowed. The decision of the respondent dated 29 December, 1995 is set aside, and this matter is referred back to the respondent, for a redetermination if the respondent chooses to do so, of whether the applicant is a danger to the public in Canada, to be made taking into account these reasons.
[25]
The reliefs sought on behalf of the applicant include an order to extend the time allowed for him to file a notice of appeal against the removal order issued against him on 9 January 1996, to the Appeal Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board. In light of my decision, I find that this is appropriate ancillary relief to allowing of the applicant's application. The applicant therefore has 30 days from the date of the issuance of my order to file his appeal.
[26]
Also sought on behalf of the applicant is an order directing the respondent to permit the applicant to return to Canada for the purposes of retaining and instructing counsel and to attend at the hearing of any appeal to the Appeal Division. It appears that this request is made in order to ensure compliance with an undertaking apparently made by counsel for the respondent at the hearing of the stay of removal application in January 1996. In my view, it is not for this court to enforce undertakings made on behalf of the Minister where there is absolutely no evidence that the undertaking will not be fulfilled, and I decline to make such an order.
Certification
[27]
In accordance with my responsibility under s. 18(1) of the
Federal Court Immigration Rules
, SOR/93-22. I provided the parties with the opportunity to make a request that I certify in my order that one or more serious questions of general importance arise in this application. I invited counsel to submit any possible questions for certification, for the purposes of enabling an appeal of my order to the Federal Court of Appeal. Counsel for the applicant submitted the following two questions for certification:
(1) Is the power granted to the respondent under s. 70(5) to form an opinion as to whether a person constitutes a danger to the public sufficiently precise to give adequate guidance for legal debate on the limits of such power and the determinative elements to such a finding?
(2) If so, what are the applicable sources from which the determinative elements or factors to be considered can be debated and applied?
Counsel for the respondent submitted that no question should be certified in this matter, as the standard of review has been determined by the Federal Court of Appeal in
Nguyen
, and this application merely deals with the manner in which that standard applies to the facts of this case.
[28]
I am cognizant that in order to be certified, a question must be one that not only transcends the interests of the immediate parties and contemplates issues of general importance, but it must also be a question that is determinative of the appeal. (
Liyanagamage v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
(1994), 176 N.R. 4 (F.C.A.), per Décary, J.A.)
On this basis, I find that the questions proposed by counsel for the applicant should not be certified. However, I disagree with the position of counsel for the respondent that no question ought to be certified. Because it is determinative of this matter, and because, in my view, it is a serious question of general importance, I will certify the following question:
"Does the phrase 'danger to the public in Canada', as it appears in s. 70(5) of the
Immigration Act
, imply a concept of 'present or future danger' that must be satisfied?"
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/slm
Footnotes
1.	R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, as amended. Section 151 reads:
"Every person who, for a sexual purpose, touches, directly or indirectly, with a part of the body or with an object, any part of the body of a person under the age of fourteen years is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years or is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction."
[End of document]
