[18]
That Sovereign was critically interested in any report that the Superintendent might make to the Minister, is reflected in the following extract from a letter dated 3 November, 1992 from counsel for Sovereign to the Superintendent.
"Since your discussion with the board [of Sovereign], management of Sovereign has undertaken a careful review of the facts and information available to it. In view of the critical importance of determining the accuracy of the financial information upon which you may be acting and Sovereign's wish to fully explain its position to you and the Minister, I would ask that you not take any action under s. 679 as such action would have a devastating impact upon Sovereign and would, for all practical purposes, impair if not remove any meaningful or effective opportunity to make a case before the Minister. Of
fundamental
importance is the
correctness
of the assumptions used in connection with the preparation of the financial statements for the Company. We are attaching a letter from Ken Clark, Actuary, on this point. It is crucial to your views of this Company to understand this issue. Based on Mr. Clark's views, the Company's ability to withstand asset impairment has for some time been substantially better than had been supposed - to the tune of at least $40,000,000.
"I would now like to address your proposed action under s. 680. From the statements made at last Friday's meeting, there would appear to be a genuine difference of opinions with respect to the financial condition and future financial prospects of the Company. For example, you appear to be particularly concerned that there has been an increase in the redemption rate of existing policies and that asset impairment is continuing to worsen. Management, however, is of the view that there has been no significant adverse change in either area in recent weeks that would warrant the type of action that you are now contemplating. In fact, there is some evidence that stabilization has recently occurred. In some respects you appear to be acting upon information obtained from competitors or potential purchasers of Sovereign. Sovereign has not been given an opportunity to respond to that information.
"Both the directors and management were extremely surprised that they were not provided with any prior indication of the course of action that you announced at the meeting last Friday. No information was conveyed to Sovereign prior to the meeting about the agenda of the meeting or the financial information presented by you to the meeting. Consequently, neither the directors nor management were in a position to respond to your conclusions as to the financial condition of the Company and your proposed course of action.
"The Company therefore requests that a meeting be held as soon as possible. We suggest Monday next (November 9, 1992) to:
a) specifically respond to various matters you addressed last Friday as the reasons for your proposed course of action; and
b) review in detail with the Company's advisors the basis for your assessment of the Company's assets and its financial condition so as to fully understand the difference between your views and those of the Company, consulting actuary, Ken Clark and Deloitte & Touche. In making this request we wish to provide a meaningful and constructive response to your concerns and to insure that you have accurate information upon which to base your decision. Understanding these differences will also assist the board which, as you know, includes eminent Canadians to conclude what course of action is in the best interest of the Company and its policyholders at this time.
"It is absolutely fundamental to fairness that Sovereign be given the full reasons for the Superintendent's actions and a full understanding of the financial information upon which the Superintendent is acting. In view of the drastic consequences of the Superintendent's actions, a refusal to provide the information and documentation upon which the Superintendent may be acting would amount to a breach of the rules of fairness: ... it is the desire of Sovereign to insure that the Superintendent is acting upon correct information. Only by fully understanding that information can Sovereign meaningfully ensure that the information which the Superintendent is acting upon is fair and accurate." (citations omitted)