[22]
Toward the end of the meeting on November 30th, at the request of the Minister of State, the Superintendent, Mr. Mackenzie, commented and had the following exchange with Mr. Clark:
"Mr. MACKENZIE: Minister, first of all I should make it abundantly clear to you that to write the memorandum that we did some weeks ago was done by us, contrary to the impression given here this morning, with extraordinary reluctance. There is no question, we do not desire to sink a company that is solvent. That's the last thing on earth we want to do. Secondly, that this situation as you know has been going on for some time and the activities to search out a new buyer have been going for some time and the buyers identified here, potential buyers, are very sophisticated people armed with their own competent actuaries as well as other personnel. Thirdly, I guess the only real new information that we have as a result of this morning is that Mr. Clark has moved from a provisional opinion to a concrete definitive opinion.
"MR. CLARKE: Oh, let me interrupt, please. That's not the case. I think I used the word provisional. I used the word provisional because we need better quality information for me to give a definitive opinion. The word provisional is in my report and I used the word provisional in my oral presentation today.
. . . . .
"MR. MACKENZIE: Well, finally, Mr. Minister ... I'm just reflecting on that last statement. I have not at the moment, based on what I've heard this morning, been persuaded to change my view. I have heard nothing that is a surprise to me in that sense. I mean I obviously owe it to the situation, that we've been given a substantial amount of information here, that we will promptly review this information and get back to you [the Minister of State] tomorrow to confirm or not our conclusion as stated."
The Minister of State thanked those attending and concluded:
"I will be reporting to the Minister of Finance what transpired today and he will be making a decision regarding this in the near future and we'll so inform you."