[33]
In
Boulis v. Minister of Manpower and Immigration
, [see footnote 3] a statutory appeal with leave direct to the Supreme Court of Canada from an exercise of statutory discretion by the Immigration Appeal Board, Mr. Justice Abbott wrote:
"In my opinion however, such an appeal can succeed only if it be shown that the Board (a) has refused to exercise its jurisdiction or (b) failed to exercise the discretion given under s. 15 in accordance with well established legal principles. As to those principles, Lord Macmillan speaking for the Judicial Committee said in
D.R. Fraser and Co. Ltd v. Minister of National Revenue,
...:
'The criteria by which the exercise of a statutory discretion must be judged have been defined in many authoritative cases, and it is well settled that if the discretion has been exercised bona fide, uninfluenced by irrelevant considerations and not arbitrarily or illegally, no court is entitled to interfere even if the court, had the discretion been theirs, might have exercised it otherwise.'"
Much more recently, in a decision relating to the exercise of statutory discretion by a Minister, in the
Williams v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, [see footnote 4] Mr. Justice Strayer wrote:
"It is striking that s. 70(5) says that no appeal may be made under s. 70(1) 'where the
Minister
is of the opinion ...', not 'where a
judge
is of the opinion ...' that the deportee constitutes a danger. Nor did Parliament put the matter in objective terms whereby a certificate precluding further appeal could only be issued where it is 'established' or 'determined' that the appellant constitutes a danger to the public in Canada. Instead the power to make such a finding is stated in subjective terms: the test is not whether the permanent resident
is a danger to the public
but whether 'the Minister
is of the opinion
that he is such a danger.' There is ample authority that, unless the overall scheme of the
Act
indicates otherwise through e.g., an unlimited right of appeal of such an opinion, such subjective decisions cannot be judicially reviewed except on grounds such as that the decision-maker acted in bad faith, or erred in law, or acted upon the basis of irrelevant considerations."
By footnote referencing the "unlimited right of appeal of such an opinion", Mr. Justice Strayer refers to a matter where a right of appeal was provided by statute to be in the nature of a trial de novo. That is not the case with the appeal before me. While Mr. Justice Strayer had before him a matter where the discretionary decision of the Minister was subject to judicial review rather than to a statutory appeal, I am satisfied that his statement of the appropriate standard of review is equally applicable to the standard of review on this statutory appeal. I am further satisfied that the term "illegally" as adopted by Mr. Justice Abbott in
Boulis
and the expression "erred in law" as used by Mr. Justice Strayer in
Williams
, include errors of jurisdiction and breaches of natural justice and procedural fairness.
Issues