[40]
In
Muliadi v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
[see footnote 6] Mr. Justice Stone wrote at page 218:
"Secondly, the evidence before us strongly suggest that the decision to refuse the appellant's application was made by a government of Ontario official rather than by the visa officer. That evidence appears in paragraph 3(m) of the appellant's affidavit ... . It relates to what transpired at the appellant's interview ... by the visa officer. He states:
'I was told straight away by Mr. Lukie that my application was being refused and he showed me as constituting the reason therefore, a telex sent to him from what I understood to be the Province of Ontario, refusing my application. I asked him, why did he call me for an interview if an assessment by him was not to be made, and he said he was very sympathetic to my case, but he was sorry for
as the decision was made by the authority who sent the telex, there was nothing he could do about it
... The interview left me with no doubt that the decision (or assessment) had not been made by him but rather by the person or authority who sent the telex and that he had neither authority or discretion in the matter.' (emphasis added)
"That evidence, as I have already observed, has not been contradicted in any way by the respondents.
"It is elementary that the decision on the application had to be made by the visa officer and that it could not be delegated in the above fashion. The visa officer appears to have allowed it to be made by the person in Ontario from whom he received information regarding the viability of the appellant's business plan. Though he was entitled to receive information on that subject from that source it remained his duty to decide the matter in accordance with the
Act
and the
Regulations
. It was therefore a serious error to allow the decision to be made by the Ontario official rather than kept in his own hands where it properly belonged. That being so, I think the appeal should succeed on this ground as well." [See footnote 7]