[53]
The conclusions of the Minister of State in his report to the Minister of Finance are in the following terms:
"The Superintendent is recommending that you direct him to take control of the company and request that the Attorney General apply to the court for the winding up of the company. The company is asking that it be given until February to verify its view of its financial condition and potentially line up new investors to inject more capital.
"The company has been provided with reasonable opportunities to make representations.
"The possibility exists under the
Insurance Companies Act
for an independent actuarial assessment to be done of the company. However, while this possibility was referred to in the company's original written submission, it was not raised by Sovereign's representatives at their meeting with me and their formal recommendation remains as set out above. Appointing an independent actuary and having his report would take significant time and thus would in practice amount to agreeing with the company's suggestion and rejecting the approach of the Superintendent. Accordingly, I do not believe it is a separate option that needs to be considered.
"I think that there are three main issues to be addressed. They are set out in my letter to the Superintendent dated December 9, 1992. [The letter requesting answers to certain questions, as referred to earlier in these reasons] The first is the issue of potential investors willing to inject additional capital to cover potential or actual losses and to increase the earning capacity of the company. The second is the reasonable level of loan loss provisions. The third is the issue of the possible reduction of actuarial reserve liabilities, thus adding to the company's capital.
"While the company has sought to demonstrate that the company's financial condition is not as serious as described by the Superintendent, certain points cannot be ignored. Many of these are not actuarial in nature but are rather issues of what is reasonable to assume about loan losses and investment performance. There has been disagreement about the key assumptions used by the Superintendent versus Sovereign and indeed about whether the Superintendent was provided full information about Mr. Clark's analysis. (The Superintendent noted in his November 18 report that the necessary support for Mr. Clark's assumptions was not documented, while Sovereign noted that Mr. Clark has articulated his assumptions and methodology. I have noted that on November 11, Mr. Clark provided the Board of Sovereign with a supplement to his report of November 9 in which he notes 'my statutory report to OSFI for the 1992 financial statements will describe completely the revised basis, including the revised basis for the asset impairment assumptions'.)
"On the first point about potential investors, I would note that, despite clear deadlines to come up with an offer, no one has indicated an unqualified willingness to put up money in order to cover losses and preserve the right to buy the company. The most recent exchange of correspondence makes clear that there are no firm commitments to inject material new capital and indeed, the Superintendent notes that one potential buyer's interest (Sun Life) was significantly overstated to me in the company's initial written and oral representations (a fact that the company's latest submission does not rebut).
"On the second issue of loan and real estate losses, the loan loss provisions determined by the Superintendent are at least $17 million higher than the company's at the end of this year. According to the Superintendent, approximately 25% of the company's assets (some $200 million) are either non-performing, or under-performing or at risk of becoming so, and this is supported by credit consultants working with the Superintendent's examination staff. As at the end of October, loan arrears were continuing to rise. The company questions this but the table which the company provides indicates that there is support for the Superintendent's view (particularly if one looks at the gross totals before deducting loans that are committed to be brought back on side or sold -- which is sensible to focus on since commitments may not materialize). The Superintendent's approach is based on a combination of company-specific and more general provisions for losses. The Superintendent has considerable experience in this area since he deals with a wide range and large number of financial institutions. The Superintendent has indicated that a conservative view of the full value of future losses from a $200 million problem loan and real estate portfolio is closer to $100 million, which is much higher than the company is providing for. Ultimately this has to be a matter of your relying on the judgment of those responsible for regulating financial institutions.
"Thirdly, there is a debate over whether it is prudent to release a substantial amount of money from the company's actuarial policy reserves, and whether this would solve the company's problems. The company's actuary stands by his view that $52 million can be shifted into capital and the company has noted that some other actuaries agree with its approach. The Superintendent, however, believes that only $16 million can reasonably be shifted and, in his November 18 report, the Superintendent noted that this would not provide a solution to the company's problem. Sun Life says that such a reduction in policy reserves, even if agreed to by the Superintendent, does not improve Sun Life's interest in acquiring the company without someone providing guarantees against expected losses on the loan and real estate portfolios.
"According to the Superintendent, the key difference in approaches is the investment return assumed in setting up the actuarial reserves. I would note that, the letter I received from Mr. McCrossan and Mr. Clark dated December 13 suggests that a change in the valuation interest rate would not have a material dollar effect on liabilities. At the same time, Mr. Clark's report dated November 11 to the Board of Sovereign indicates that the main difference between his valuation of policy liabilities and the valuation of policy liabilities made by Sovereign's former actuary is the assumed investment return rate.
"I believe there is reasonable doubt whether a company such as Sovereign with poor quality assets can earn the return necessary to justify the reduction in policy reserves requested by the company. I would also note that even if the Superintendent were to accept the company's view that a large release in actuarial reserves is warranted, I do not believe that the Superintendent would change his recommendations, given his other concerns about lack of adequate provisions for loan and real estate losses and poor earning capacity.
"I believe that you have to weigh these factors in light of the risks for policy holders. It is certainly the case that, if the company should prove able to meet its liabilities as they come due, that is the best outcome for policyholders. However given the views of the Superintendent, that outcome cannot be considered as anything close to certain. Thus I believe that you should weigh the risk for policyholders resulting from the various options. Indeed, I believe that policyholders' interests have to be the priority.
"It should be noted, for background, that, under a liquidation with proportional reinsurance as recommended by the Superintendent, a buyer would assume Sovereign's business at a price dictated by what Sovereign's assets are worth: the lower the value of the assets, the larger discount to the face value of the policy (i.e., the less coverage) the buyer would provide to policyholders. Policies up to $200,000 and annuities up to $60,000 are fully protected by the industry-run CompCorp policyholder insurance arrangement. Policyholders with policies over the $200,000 CompCorp limit would stand to lose as coverage would be reduced by the amount of the discount of the buyer of the business.
"If the company remains open pursuant to the company's recommendation, and deteriorates further as the Superintendent believes, or is found as of February to be in worse shape than the company now believes, it is policyholders who will be harmed. For example, policyholders with claims prior to a closure would be paid out in full while policyholders with claims after a closure would receive payouts only to the maximum of $200,000 provided by CompCorp. Also, while a liquidation could probably be done now with all of the assets and liabilities being sold to a buyer at a small discount, a liquidation done later might only be done by selling the assets and liabilities at a much deeper discount. I think that it is valid to base a decision on minimising the risk of further downsize for policyholders as opposed to basing a decision on a chance of an upside."
In the result, the Minister of State recommended that the Minister of Finance adopt the Superintendent's three recommendations.