[57]
I am satisfied that the duty of fairness owed by the Minister on an administrative decision such as this is relatively low. In
Save Richmond Farmland Society et al. v. Richmond (Township) et al.
[see footnote 8], Mr. Justice LaForest wrote at pp. 1231 and 1232 [S.C.R.]:
"The aldermen who participate in such a process should be viewed accordingly not as judges, but as elected representatives who are answerable to the concerns of their constituents.
"The above result finds support in the decisions of this court in
Martineau
v. Masqui Disciplinary Board,
[1980] 1 S.C.R. 602, and
Knight v. Indian Head School Division No. 19
, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 653, which both stress that the attributes of natural justice that apply in a given context will vary according to the character of the decision made. Dickson, J., put the matter well in
Martineau
, supra, at pp. 628-629:
'... A purely ministerial decision, on broad grounds of public policy, will typically afford the individual no procedural protection, and any attack upon such a decision will have to be founded upon abuse of discretion. Similarly, public bodies exercising legislative functions may not be amenable to judicial supervision. On the other hand, a function that approaches the judicial end of the spectrum will entail substantial procedural safeguards. Between the judicial decisions and those which are discretionary and policy-oriented will be found a myriad decision-making processes with a flexible graduation of procedural fairness through the administrative spectrum.'"
On the facts before me, I am satisfied that I am examining a ministerial decision, based on broad grounds of public policy, which in the words of Mr. Justice Dickson, as he then was, quoted with approval by Mr. Justice LaForest, "... will typically afford the individual [in this case Sovereign] no procedural protection ...". An exception must, of course, be made for procedural protection required on the face of the statute authorizing the ministerial discretion, in this case, the Minister's obligation to provide Sovereign a reasonable opportunity to make representations.