[59]
In
Mercier v. Commission canadienne des droits de la personne
[see footnote 10], Mr. Justice Décary wrote at p. 13 [F.C.]:
"In the case at bar, the appellant certainly was never in a position to foresee, a fortiori to counter, the decision the Commission was going to make, nor to know nor even suspect the grounds on which it would decide not to follow its investigator's recommendation. The investigation report was in fact favourable to her. The Service's comments were filed without her knowledge and outside the time limit which the Commission had imposed and described as mandatory. These comments were much more than argument based on the facts set out by the investigator in his report; on the contrary, they were replete with facts that did not appear in the file that had until then been before the Commission, and went so far as to attack the appellant's credibility."
Mr. Justice Décary continued at p. 14:
"I am not saying that the rules of procedural fairness require that the Commission systematically disclose to one party the comments it receives from the other; I am saying that they require this when those comments contain facts that differ from the facts set out in the investigation report which the adverse party would have been entitled to try to rebut had it known about them at the stage of the investigation, properly speaking."
In
Cardinal Insurance Co., Re
, [see footnote 11] a case with a fact situation much more similar to that before me than those in the immediately proceeding cases and involving a decision-maker and a decision also of a more similar nature, Mr. Justice Urie wrote at pp. 707 and 708 [D.L.R.]:
"I am of the opinion that the failure to make Cardinal aware of the existence of those documents and their contents [2 reports to the Minister by the Superintendent of Insurance and a third document in the nature of a briefing paper for a hearing held by the Minister] did not constitute a breach of a principle of natural justice. The memorandum of January 29, 1982, was, as stated, a report made in accordance with the requirements of ss. 103.2(1) of the
Act
and, at the time of its issuance, all of the information contained therein was known to Cardinal, including, as already found, the possibility of the company's assets being taken over by the superintendent. Insofar as the February 4th memorandum is concerned, much of the information contained therein was supplied by Cardinal and the remainder was known to it since it resulted from the meetings held with Union and Cardinal after January 29th. The briefing memorandum of February 8th, contains nothing that was not known to Cardinal.
"In
Lazarov v. Secretary of State of Canada
(1973), 39 D.L.R.(3d) 738 at pp. 749-750, ... Thurlow, J., as he then was, had this to say about the requirement to disclose the existence of confidential reports and their contents:
'In my opinion, therefore, the rule "audi alteram partem" applies whenever the Minister proposes to exercise his discretion to refuse an application on the basis of facts pertaining to the particular applicant or his application and where he has not already had an opportunity in the course of the proceedings before the Citizenship Court he must be afforded a fair opportunity in one way or another of stating his position with respect to any matters which in the absence of refutation or explanation would lead to the rejection of his application. That is not to say that a confidential report or its contents need be disclosed to him but the pertinent allegations which if undenied or unresolved would lead to rejection of his application must, as I see it, be made known to him to an extent sufficient to enable him to respond to them and he must have a fair opportunity to dispute or explain them.'
"I am of the opinion that this reasoning is wholly applicable to this case. There had been from the beginning complete disclosure of information in the possession of the Minister to Cardinal so that it was in a position to make full response thereto and to make all submissions and representations necessary to support its position."