[9]
In
Hoffmann-La Roche
, this court was asked to determine whether the term "medicine" could include a "pharmaceutical composition" which had therapeutic value. The drug at issue was a nasal spray intended for the treatment of inflammation of human nasal mucosa. It was composed of an active ingredient (the chemical Form A flunisolide) which was mixed with inactive ingredients (solvents, gases, and other spray components) which were needed for ideal delivery of the active ingredient to the affected area. Noël, J., held that this particular composition was a "medicine" within the meaning of the
Regulations
. First, it had a therapeutic effect. Second, by virtue of s. 33(2) of the
Interpretation Act
[see footnote 3], the term "medicine" was not restricted to one substance but could encompass many substances. Third, the
Regulations
did not restrict these substances to active ingredients, nor did they exclude a claim for a composition or formulation which includes an active ingredient. The presence of inactive ingredients which form an integral part of the formulation and assist in the delivery of the active ingredient to the body do not remove the composition from the definition of "medicine". As stated by Noël, J.:
"Pharmaceutical compositions with therapeutic value are a medicine in common parlance. Indeed more active ingredients must be combined with stabilizing agents or absorption vehicles in one form or another to allow a patient to effectively ingest a medicine and achieve the intended therapeutic effect. As such, a medicine, like a drug, is generally understood to be a preparation or composition including active and nonactive ingredients. This commonly understood meaning is unaltered by the definition of the word 'medicine' under the
Regulations
. While this definition refers to a 'substance' in the singular, it obviously can encompass more than one substance when regard is had to s. 33(2) of the
Interpretation Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-21. A substance does not cease to be a medicine when joined mixed with another substance just the same as a medicine does not cease to be a medicine because it can cure more than one disease." [see footnote 4]