[1]
Dubé, J.
: The issue to be resolved in this matter is whether the October 11, 1989, decision of the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal ("the Tribunal") constitutes reviewable error justifying the granting of certiorari or prohibition in that it gave rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of the Tribunal Chairperson and, through his influence, the other Tribunal members.
[2]
Peter Cranston, one of the complainants affected by the Tribunal's decision, was a pilot for the Executive Flight Service ("the Service") operated by the Department of Transport, from 1966 to June 30, 1986. All members of the Service were laid off as of the latter date as a result of its transfer to the Department of National Defence ("the Department"). They were informed there was no possibility of their transfer to the Department because the average age of the pilots was above the age acceptable to the Department.
[3]
At the time of the lay-offs, the mean age of the pilots was 51. Cranston was 58; ten of the other complainants were over 55. The military's mandatory retirement age of 55 is stipulated in ss. 15.17 and 15.31 of the Queen's Regulations and Orders [see footnote 1].
[4]
In November and December 1985, the pilots filed complaints with the Canadian Human Rights Commission ("the Commission") alleging discrimination in employment based on age, contrary to ss. 3(1) and 7(a), and s. 10 of the Canadian Human Rights Act [see footnote 2] ("the Act") which read:
"3(1) For all purposes of this Act, race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, age, sex, marital status, family status, disability and conviction for which a pardon has been granted are prohibited grounds of discrimination.
"7. It is a discriminatory practice, directly or indirectly,
(a) to refuse to employ or continue to employ any individual, ...
...
on a prohibited ground of discrimination.
...
"10. It is a discriminatory practice for an employer, employee organization or organization of employers
(a) to establish or pursue a policy or practice, or
(b) to enter into an agreement affecting recruitment, referral, hiring, promotion, training, apprenticeship, transfer or any other matter relating to employment or prospective employment,
that deprives or tends to deprive an individual or class of individuals of any employment opportunities on a prohibited ground of discrimination."
[5]
The hearings before the Tribunal culminating in the decision giving rise to this motion took place in May and October 1989. The transcript of proceedings shows that the arguments and objections leading up to this decision by the Chairman were at times untidy and chaotic. Although counsel for the Commission was well aware at the outset of the Department's intention to use as a defence the military's mandatory retirement age of 55, it was not until shortly prior to the commencement of the actual hearings that he advanced his challenge to the constitutional validity of the above-cited Queen's Regulations and Orders. After much debate the Chairman, the respondent Robert W. Kerr, ruled that the validity of the mandatory retirement age in the Canadian Forces was not properly before the Tribunal as there had been no prior notice, and that it was not apparent from the complaints that the interpretation of s. 15(b) of the Act would have to be addressed. The subsection reads:
"15. It is not a discriminatory practice if
...
(b) employment of an individual is refused or terminated because that individual has not reached the minimum age, or has reached the maximum age, that applies to that employment by law or under regulations, which may be made by the Governor-in-Council for the purposes of this paragraph."
[6]
Earlier, at the outset of the hearings, during the course of a meeting in chambers, Chairman Kerr had informed counsel of his involvement in an organization providing major funding for a Charter challenge before the Supreme Court of Canada on the issue of mandatory retirement.
[7]
Following the above ruling, counsel for the Commission requested an adjournment to consult with the Commission as, in his view, the Chairman's denial of his right to challenge the validity of the above regulations effectively annihilated the cases of the eleven complainants who had been over 55 at the time of the lay-offs.
[8]
In January 1990, prior to the filing of the instant motion, the Tribunal reconvened in order to consider the Commission's offer of the opportunity for Mr. Kerr to resign. The Tribunal was presented with Cranston's affidavit in which he stated his belief (paragraphs 52 to 56) that the Tribunal's ruling was the result of the Chairperson's "uneasiness with issues relating to age limitations" because of his involvement in the Charter challenge before the Supreme Court of Canada.
[9]
The Commission's position is that Chairman Kerr had bent over backwards in an effort to counterbalance his involvement with the mandatory retirement issue: he had gone too far in the opposite direction.
[10]
The Chairman admitted (at page 221 of the Motion Record) that "if the issue of mandatory retirement were before this Tribunal it might well be a situation where a reasonable apprehension of bias would arise, given the Chair's involvement with respect to that issue in another forum". But, the Chairman continued (at pp. 221-222):
"because there was no indication in the complaints ... that the issue of mandatory retirement was involved, it never occurred to me as Chair that any question of possible bias arose, until the exchange of correspondence between counsel in the spring of 1989, when Mr. Duval for the first time made reference to the issue ... I drew this matter to the attention of counsel at the beginning of the May hearing ... At that time counsel for [the Commission] raised no argument based on possible bias ... If the Tribunal decides the issue is properly before it, it must then, of course, decide whether to disqualify itself ... The mandatory retirement issue did, we accept, arise naturally out of the case ... The problem being that it arose very late in the proceedings: too late, in our view, for fairness to allow it to be considered, which is the basis for our preliminary ruling."
[11]
It appears that in a 1989 case involving Via Rail's mandatory retirement policy, representations were made to the effect that Chairman Kerr had been personally involved with the issue of mandatory retirement and that a reasonable apprehension of bias arose therefrom. At that time, Kerr resigned his appointment.
[12]
The classic test for determining the apprehension of bias is the one enunciated by Mr. Justice de Grandpré in his dissenting judgment in Committee for Justice and Liberty Foundation et al. v. National Energy Board et al. (1976), [see footnote 3] (at page 394 S.C.R.):
"The proper test to be applied in a matter of this type was correctly expressed by the Court of Appeal. As already seen by the quotation above, the apprehension of bias must be a reasonable one, held by reasonable and right minded persons, applying themselves to the question and obtaining thereon the required information. In the words of the Court of Appeal, that test is 'what would an informed person, viewing the matter realistically and practically - and having thought the matter through - conclude. Would he think that it is more likely than not that Mr. Crowe, whether consciously or unconsciously, would not decide fairly'."
[13]
More recently, in FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, I had to apply that test to the presence on a selection board of a chairman who had discussed the substance of a pending Court action between the two parties. I found there was a reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of the chairman against the plaintiff. I said (at page 361 F.C.):
"The plaintiff does have valid grounds for harbouring a reasonable apprehension of bias. A realistic view of the situation by any reasonable person must be that the Chairman of the Selection Board is more likely than not, consciously or unconsciously, to be biased vis-à-vis the candidacy of the plaintiff."
[14]
In the present case, I also find that there are valid grounds to sustain a reasonable apprehension of bias in the minds of the complainants. It is apparent that a situation had been created in which the Chairman might be suspected of what I would call a "reverse bias". As mentioned earlier, in a somewhat similar situation involving Via Rail complainants, Chairman Kerr resigned without hesitation. In this instance, he admits himself that "if the issue of mandatory retirement were before this Tribunal it might well be a situation where a reasonable apprehension of bias would arise".
[15]
The Chairman seemed to think that he could not be suspected of bias in the instant proceedings merely because the issue of mandatory retirement was not raised at the proper time. Obviously, that cannot be the applicable criterion. Again, the test is whether or not the complainants, who are informed persons - they know about mandatory retirement, they claim they are victims of that requirement and they know that the Chairman was involved, albeit on their side, in similar matters before the Supreme Court of Canada - could realistically and practically conclude that Mr. Kerr, consciously or unconsciously, was bending over backwards, to their detriment, so as to show his impartiality in the matter.
[16]
A reading of the transcript shows that in the course of the proceedings the Chairman elected a very legalistic approach to extricate himself from the corner into which he had boxed himself. It is very likely that if the issue of mandatory retirement had been raised by the Commission at the outset, the Chairman would have acted in this case exactly as he did in the Via Rail case. The mere fact that the issue arose later on in the hearing is not a valid defence against an application for judicial review on the basis of reasonable apprehension of bias.
[17]
No reasonable apprehension of bias has been raised directly against the other members of the Tribunal, but the jurisprudence is clearly to the effect that the decision of a Tribunal consisting of more than one member will be vitiated if the circumstances establish a likelihood that any member, and more particularly the Chairman, participating in the decision is biased in favour or against one of the parties. [see footnote 5].
[18]
Moreover, pursuant to s. 43 of the Canadian Human Rights Act, the Tribunal's jurisdiction is limited to deciding the merits of the complaint "at the conclusion of its inquiry". The Tribunal's decision of October 11, 1989, denying counsel for the Commission the right to argue that the Department's regulations do not meet the requirements of s. 15(b) of the Act, did in fact settle the fate of the eleven complainants over the age of 55. Again, had that argument been made by the Commission at the complaint stage, rather than much later in the proceedings, the present situation might have been avoided. A new hearing will afford all parties concerned the opportunity for a clean start.
[19]
Counsel for the respondents, who forcefully denied any bias on the part of the Chairman, suggested that if I should find in favour of the applicant and the complainants, I might sever the proceedings under s. 40(4) of the Act and allow the proceedings to continue with reference to the complainants who are under the age of 55. I have seriously considered that proposal, but find it impractical and possibly unfair to some of the complainants who are not yet 55 but will be in the near future: the difficulty is to draw a line without creating any injustice.
[20]
Consequently, I will allow the motion and quash the decision rendered by the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal on October 11, 1989. I also order the respondent Sydney Lederman to appoint a new Tribunal to hear the complaints. The notice of motion seeks no costs and none will be awarded.
Motion granted.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/jla
Footnotes
1. 1968 revision, issued under the authority of the National Defence Act.
2. R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6.
3. [1978] 1 S.C.R. 369; 9 N.R. 115.
4. [1989] 2 F.C. 353; 24 F.T.R. 216.
5. See Weimer v. Symons et al. (1987), 57 Sask.R. 155, at p. 160 (Q.B.) and International Union of Mine, Mill and Smelter Workers, Local 1011 v. United Steel Workers of America Local 2952 and Labour Relations Board (1964), 48 W.W.R. (N.S.) 15 (B.C.C.A.).
[End of document]
