[4]
The applicant is the former Head, Technology and Industry Development, Energy Technology Branch, Natural Re­sources Canada (hereinafter the Ministry). On June 4
, 1984 he began working part-time from his home. Sometime in 1985 he ac­quired candidiasis and Myalgic En­cephalomyelitis (hereinafter chronic fatigue syndrome). Eventually, the respondent at­tempted to secure a return to work by the applicant but his return to full time work in the summer of 1988 only resulted in him having to go on sick leave as a result of stress. After his sick leave credits had been exhausted, his supervisors granted him leave without pay on September 19, 1988. The Treasury Board policy under which his supervisors granted this leave provides (re­spondent's record at Tab 30):
"When employees are unable to work due to illness or injury and have exhausted their sick leave credits or injury on duty leave, managers must consider granting leave without pay.
"Where it is clear that the employee will not be able to return to duty within the foreseeable future, managers must consider granting such leave without pay for a period sufficient to enable the employee to make the necessary personal adjustments and preparations for separation from the Public Service on medical grounds.
"Where management is satisfied that there is a good chance the employee will be able to return to duty within a reasonable period of time (the length of which will vary according to the circumstances of the case), leave without pay provides an option to bridge the employment gap. Manage­ment must regularly re-examine all such cases to ensure that continuation of leave without pay is warranted by current medical evidence.
"Management must decide upon the termination date for such leave without pay within two years of the leave's com­mencement, although it can, in some cir­cumstances, be extended to accommodate exceptional cases.
"The period of such leave without pay must be flexible enough to allow managers to accommodate the needs of employees with special recovery problems, including their retraining."