[41]
The first factor to consider is that the nature of the question determined by the adjudicator involved an interpretation and application of procedural rules. The second factor to consider is that the expertise of the adjudicator lies in deciding procedural matters, including those relating to the presentation of grievances. Section 100 of the
PSSRA
, provides:
"100(1) The Board may make regulations in relation to the procedure for the presentation of grievances, including regulations respecting
(a) the manner and form of presenting a grievance;
. . . . .
"(3) The Board may make regulations in relation to the adjudication of grievances, including regulations respecting
(a) the manner in which and the time within which a grievance may be re­ferred to adjudication after it has been presented up to and including the final level in the grievance process; [...]"
"100(1) La Commission peut prendre des règlements relatifs à la procédure ap­plicable aux griefs, notamment en ce qui concerne:
a) leurs mode et formalités de présentation;
. . . . .
"(3) La Commission peut prendre des règlements régissant l'arbitrage des griefs, notamment en ce qui concerne:
a) le mode et le délai de renvoi d'un grief à l'arbitrage après sa présentation jusqu'au dernier palier inclusivement; [...]"
No regulations cover the procedure governing the manner in which grievances may be referred to adjudication. Section 11 of the
P.S.S.R.B. Regulations
is, therefore, relevant. It provides:
"11. Where a procedural matter that is not provided for by these Regulations arises during the course of a proceeding before the Board, the matter shall be dealt with in such manner as the Board directs."
"11. Toute question d'ordre procédural qui survient au cours d'une procédure devant la Commission et qui n'est pas prévue au présent règlement est traitée de la manière ordonnée par la Commission."
Through the operation of s. 96.1, as cited above, the discretion in s. 11 to shape pro­cedure is granted to adjudicators. Whether the decision in question falls under ss. 100(1)(a), 100(3)(a) or s. 11, it is clear that it falls within the adjudicator's realm of expertise. This fact supports the conclusion that a certain amount of deference be shown to the adjudicator's decision.