[14]
I do not accept the CRA's argument that McKellar's general delay in proceeding with its application can be the basis for a summary dismissal of its application. That is a question which is inherently bound up with issues of relative prejudice to the parties (and possibly to the affected donors) and should be argued on the merits of the application. Although there is ample authority that delay can be a basis for denying prerogative relief, it is not appropriate to deal with that issue in isolation to the many other considerations which bear on the granting of such relief. This point is addressed by Justice Andrew MacKay in Vancouver Island Peace Society v. Canada [1994] 1 F.C. 102, [1993] F.C.J. No. 601 in the following passage at paragraphs 23-24:
Often the considerations affecting the exercise of discretion will require an appreciation of the circumstances in which the motion arises and of the relief sought. Frequently that appreciation is only fully provided by presentation of the applicant's case based on the originating motion and supporting affidavits. Particularly where the preliminary motion to strike if filed, but not yet heard, just before the commencement of a special hearing scheduled to consider the originating motion, it may be more expeditious, and of assistance to the Court's appreciation of the case for judicial review, to have the applicant's case fully presented. Here the respondents urge that it would be more expeditious if the preliminary motion to strike be granted, for the Court could then avoid argument on the merits of the application for judicial review. For the applicants, however, it is urged that response to the matters raised in the preliminary motion to strike requires dealing with many of the matters that would otherwise be presented in relation to the merits of the originating motion.
In the circumstances of this application, and in light of the timing of the respondents' preliminary motion, I was not persuaded that the Court should exercise discretion to strike the originating motion.