[19]
Humanitarian and compassionate guidelines are found in Chapter IP 5: Immigration Applications in Canada Made on Humanitarian or Compassionate (H & C) Grounds:
"
6. THE H & C DECISION
"
6.1 What is meant by 'humanitarian and compassionate grounds'
"Applicants making an application under R2.1 are requesting processing in Canada due to compassionate or humanitarian considerations. Subsection R2.1 provides the flexibility to approve deserving cases for processing within Canada, the circumstances of which were not anticipated in the legislation.
"Applicants bear the onus of satisfying the decision-maker that their personal circumstances are such that the hardship of having to obtain an immigrant visa from outside Canada in the normal manner would be (i)
unusual and undeserved
or (ii)
disproportionate
. Applicants may present whatever facts they feel are relevant.
"The following definitions are not meant as 'hard and fast' rules; rather, they are an attempt to provide guidance to decision makers when they exercise their discretion in determining whether sufficient H&C considerations exist to warrant the requested exemption from A9(1).
"
Unusual and undeserved hardship
"The hardship (of having to apply for an immigrant visa from outside of Canada) that the applicant would face should be, in most cases, unusual. In other words, a hardship not anticipated by the Act or Regulations,
and
"The hardship (of having to apply for an immigrant visa from outside of Canada) that the applicant would face should be, in most cases, the result of circumstances beyond the person's control.
"
Disproportionate hardship
"Humanitarian and compassionate grounds may exist in cases that would not meet the 'unusual and undeserved' criteria but where the hardship (of having to apply for an immigrant visa from outside of Canada) would have a disproportionate impact on the applicant due to his or her personal circumstances.
"
6.2 General establishment guidelines
. . . . .
"
Consider the following factors to assess establishment in Canada:
- Does the applicant have a history of stable employment?
- Is there a pattern of sound financial management?
- Has the applicant integrated into the community through involvement in community organizations, volunteer or other activities?
- Has the applicant undertaken any professional, linguistic or other study that show integration into Canadian society?
- Do the applicant and family members have a good civil record in Canada? (e.g. no interventions by police or other authorities for child or spouse abuse, criminal charges)"
IV.
Analysis
1. Standard of Review