[3]
Prothonotary Hargrave has described the Statement of Claim and the Ermineskin defendants' motion in a concise and clear fashion. I adopt his description as set out in paragraphs 2-6 that follow:
"[2] The plaintiffs in this litigation set out in their Statement of Claim that they are the children and descendants of Fred and Mina Hodgson, the latter either being a member of or being entitled to be regis­tered as a member of the Ermineskin Indian Band.
"[3] By resolution of 16 November 1937 the Ermineskin Band Council made Fred and Mina Hodgson, together with Amy Pugh, Alma Duwer and Larry Hodgson, Band members.
"[4] On 7 January 1944, the Minister of Mines and Resources is said to have wrongly deleted from Band registration the names of Mina and Fred Hodgson and of five of the plaintiffs, a decision which the Minister, despite requests, including from the Chief and Council of the Ermineskin Band, refused to reconsider.
"[5] Next in the Statement of Claim, come paragraphs 10 and 11 which the Band wishes struck out:
'10. That the defendant, Ermineskin Indian Band #942 and the defendant, Ermineskin Band Council have publicly stated that those sections of the
Indian Act
which deal with membership in the Band are unconstitutional and that the control of membership in a Band is an aboriginal right held by the individual Bands that cannot be restricted by any provision of the
Indian Act
.
'11. That despite numerous demands made by the plaintiffs herein, the defen­dants, Ermineskin Indian Band No. 942 and the Ermineskin Band Council, have refused and continue to refuse to honour the Band Council Resolution dated November 16, 1937.'
. . . . .
"[6] In May of 1987 the Ermineskin Band, pursuant to the
Indian Act
, adopted its own membership rules and a code con­trolling membership. The plaintiffs say that despite many requests all of the defen­dants, including the Ermineskin Band, have refused to deal with the question of the plaintiffs' membership in the Band as provided for by the membership rules and code (paragraph 13 of the Statement of Claim). This brings us to the crux of State­ment of Claim, paragraph 14, which sets out that all of the defendants have breached a fiduciary duty to all of the plaintiffs. The particulars of the breach included allowing deletion of the names of the plaintiffs from the Band membership, failing to add subsequently born issue to the Band list and failing to protect the interest of the plaintiffs, in the result de­priving the plaintiffs of the benefit they would have had as members of the Ermineskin Band. In full paragraph 14 is as follows:
'14. Each and all of the defendant's herein have a fiduciary duty to each and all of the plaintiffs herein and that this fiduciary duty has been breached by each and all of the defendants herein, some particulars of which are as follows:
a) Allowing the deletion of the names of the plaintiffs, Larry Hodgson, Harley Hodgson, Amy Pugh, Alma Duwar, and Peggy Lundie from the Ermineskin Band list as of January 7, 1944, thereby depriving the plaintiffs of any benefits, financial or otherwise, they would have received as Ermineskin Band Members subsequent to January 7, 1944 to date of trial;
b) Failing to add the names of the plaintiffs, Theodore Hodgson, Dennis Hodgson and Carol Leeb to the Ermineskin Band List as of their re­spective dates of birth thereby de­priving the said plaintiffs from any benefits, financial or otherwise, they may have received as Ermineskin Band Members subsequent to their respective dates of birth to date of trial;
c) Failing to advise the plaintiffs herein as to the benefits they may be entitled to and failing to protect the interest of the plaintiffs herein by taking a course of action which has deprived the plain­tiffs herein from benefits, financial and otherwise, that they are entitled to as members of the Ermineskin Indian Band.'
"The Ermineskin Band wishes all references to the Band, as in 'all of the defendants' removed from paragraphs 13 and 14 and from all of the portions of the prayer for relief except paragraph (a). These changes would make it clear that the claim, particularly as to any monetary relief, arising by way of declarations of entitlement in the nature of benefits and for damages, interest and costs, would be the responsibility of the Crown. ..."