[18]
The plaintiff referred me to this court's decision in
Royal Doulton Tableware Ltd. v. Cassidy's Ltd.
, [1986] 1 F.C. 357; 1 C.P.R.(3d) 214 (T.D.) and Strayer, J.'s (as he then was) comments at pp. 227, 228 and 229 that the Federal Court has jurisdiction in equity to issue a declaration as to ownership of a trademark. The relevant passages are reproduced below:
"The plaintiffs further request a declaration that Paragon 'is the owner of the trademark "Victoriana Rose" for use in association with china tableware'.
It is to be noted that as framed the relief requested does not involve entitlement to registration.
In my view, it would be open to this court to make such a declaration if it had before it all the necessary evidence. I believe that this court has jurisdiction to make such a declaration pursuant to s. 20 of the
Federal Court Act
which give it concurrent jurisdiction ... (Emphasis added)
"Here the
Trade-marks Act
in ss. 1 to 11 defines and prescribes a number of rules concerning trademarks and the adoption thereof, without reference to registration. Thereafter, the
Act
only deals with registered trademarks. Within the context of s. 20 of the
Federal Court Act
, the declaration is a remedy 'in equity' and in this case with respect to a trademark. The requirements of s. 101 of the
Constitution Act
, 1867, are also met since Parliament by ss. 1 to 11 of the
Trade-marks Act
has prescribed a regime concerning what constitutes a trademark and the adoption thereof, whether registered or not.
. . . . .
"While then it would, in my view, be legally possible to issue a declaration as to ownership of an unregistered trademark, I believe in this case I should confine myself to the evidence before me relating to the use of the trademark 'Victoriana Rose'.
"... At the same time I believe it could be useful that the use issue be clarified in this way for whatever relevance it may have to the future conduct of the parties. It may also provide assistance to the registrar should Paragon seek registration of this mark, but it does not usurp the functions of the registrar who must consider many other matters before reaching a decision as to registration."