[9]
Yet it would be easy to assume that, because this applicant says she would like to join her mother in Canada and, from what we know of the comparative standards of living it would, in an ideal world, be "nicer" for her to come to Canada. The applicant argues that such a comparative analysis is required by the decision of Li v. Canada (MCI), [2004] F.C.J. No. 2055. The facts in that case were fairly similar. The applicant at the time of the proceeding was a 16 year old male Chinese citizen. His parents were divorced and his mother had moved to Canada in 1998. She did not include him in her application for permanent residence. His application for humanitarian and compassionate grounds discretion was rejected. On judicial review the applications judge set aside the decision concluding that the decision-maker had not been
alert and sensitive to the best interests of the applicant child. There is no analysis as to what the situation of the applicant child would be in China as compared to Canada. (At para. 44).
On the particular facts of that case it is distinguishable from the present. The CAIPS notes only made a formal reference to the best interests of the child without any analysis or identification of the factors taken into account and I believe that is what principally concerned the applications judge. With respect I do not understand the decision to mean that, in such circumstances, the determining factor in the child's best interests is the comparative advantage of living abroad or living in Canada and that alone. I am in respectful agreement with what Justice James Russell said in Vasquez v. Canada (MCI), [2005] F.C.J. No. 96 at paras 41-43:
41. What the Applicants are really saying in this case is that the children would obviously be better off in Canada than in Mexico or Honduras and, because they would be better off, Canada's international Convention obligations dictate that factor be given paramountcy in an H & C Decision that involves both parents and children.
42. I do not think that law, logic or established authority dictates the result urged upon the Court by the Applicants.
43. On the facts of this case, there is nothing to suggest that the children would be at risk or could not successfully re-establish themselves in Mexico or Honduras. The fact that the children might be better off in Canada in terms of general comfort and future opportunities cannot, in my view, be conclusive in an H & C Decision that is intended to assess undue hardship.