[10]
I do not understand the jurisprudence to require that the "best interests of the child" be assessed separate and apart from the question of hardship nor that it should be determinative if it indicates that the person in question would be more comfortable or have better opportunities in Canada. I believe that the majority reasons of the Federal Court of Appeal in Hawthornev. Canada (MCI), [2003] 2 F.C. 555 indicate the contrary. That case involved the more typical request for humanitarian and compassionate exemption to halt removal from Canada of a mother with a Canadian daughter who had permanent residence here. I believe however that the relationship between "best interests" and "hardship" as stated by the Court applies equally in the present case. The Court stated in part as follows:
4. The "best interests of the child" are determined by considering the benefit to the child of the parent's non-removal from Canada as well as the hardship the child would suffer from either her parent's removal from Canada or her own voluntary departure should she wish to accompany her parent abroad. Such benefits and hardship are two sides of the same coin, the coin being the best interests of the child.
* * * * * * * * * *
6. To simply require that the officer determine whether the child's best interests favour non-removal is somewhat artificial - such a finding will be a given in all but a very few, unusual cases. For all practical purposes, the officer's task is to determine, in the circumstances of each case, the likely degree of hardship to the child caused by the removal of the parent and to weigh this degree of hardship together with other factors, including public policy considerations, that militate in favour of or against the removal of the parent.
The certified question, and the answer given by the majority were as follows:
Q.: Is the requirement that the best interests of children be considered when disposing of an application for an exemption pursuant to subsection 114(2), as set out in Baker v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [1999] 2 S.C.R. 817, satisfied by considering whether the removal of the parent will subject the child to unusual, undeserved or disproportionate hardship?
A.: The requirement that the best interests of the child be considered may be satisfied, depending on the circumstances of each case, by considering the degree of hardship to which the removal of a parent exposes the child.