[11]
I am satisfied by looking at the CAIPS notes of the interviews that the Visa Officer adequately addressed herself to issues of hardship. While taking into account that it is the wish of the applicant to live with her mother she observed such facts as that: the applicant had not lived with her mother since 1992; that she was then 17 (now 18); that she lives at a boarding school and sees her grandparents on weekends; that her mother's contacts with her at least since the mother left for the United States in 1997 have been limited to phone calls three or four times a week and two visits by her mother to China in 2000 and 2004; and that her mother sends her money periodically. The Officer had no indication before her that the applicant was a needy person because of her presence in China nor was there any specific evidence as to how her life would be materially better in Canada. The only evidence in this connection was that the applicant said she would like to live with her mother. It is apparent on the basis of this information that the Visa Officer concluded there was not sufficient hardship involved in the applicant remaining in China even though the preferences of the applicant and her mother might be that she be in Canada. Against such concerns the Visa Officer was obliged, as noted by the Federal Court of Appeal in paragraph 6 of the Hawthorne case (supra) to weigh this degree of hardship against other factors such as public policy considerations. She recognized the latter in finding that paragraph 130(1)(c) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations had not been complied with when the mother applied for permanent residence as she failed to name the applicant as a family member. It was right for the Visa Officer to assume that this requirement is clear and is based on sound policy reasons. As a result she apparently concluded that such degree of hardship as might be involved in the applicant remaining in China was not sufficient, when balanced against the clear non-compliance with the Regulations, to warrant a favourable exercise of discretion under subsection 25(1) of the Act on humanitarian and compassionate grounds. I am satisfied that it is not for this Court to review that balancing of factors, it being apparent that the Visa Officer had them in mind when she made her decision.
Certified Question