[47]
The Defendants also argue that residual policy considerations negate the imposition of a duty of care. Specifically, the Defendants contend that since section 9 of the
Act
requires the Wheat Board to submit monthly and annual reports to the Minister, who must in turn submit an annual report to Parliament, the Wheat Board is responsible to Parliament and not to individual producers. In
Cooper v. Registrar of Mortgage Brokers (B.C.) et al.
, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 537; 277 N.R. 113; 160 B.C.A.C. 268; 261 W.A.C. 268 [at paras. 52-53 of N.R.], the Supreme Court of Canada clarified the "policy components" to be considered in determining whether the duty of care is negated.
"If the plaintiff is successful at the first stage of the
Anns
such that a prima facie duty of care has been established (despite the fact that the proposed duty does not fall within an already recognized category of recovery), the second stage of the
Anns
test must be addressed. That question is whether there exists residual policy considerations which justify denying liability. Residual policy considerations include, among other things, the effect of recognizing that duty of care on other legal obligations, its impact on the legal system and, in a less precise but important consideration, the effect of imposing liability on society in general." [
Edwards
, para. 10]
While the reporting provisions of the
Act
, may be an indicator to a particular policy consideration underlying the legislation, they do not, in my view, fall within the "residual policy considerations" contemplated by the Supreme Court of Canada in
Cooper
. The arguments of the Defendants fail to convince me that the reporting obligations of Wheat Board under the
Act
negate any duty of care owed to the Plaintiffs by the Defendants in the circumstances. Further, the cases cited by the Defendants in support of their argument - namely,
Riske
and
M-Jay Farms
- can be distinguished on their facts. Those cases involve the Wheat Board exercising its "day to day discretion" in fulfilling its statutory mandate; that is, in setting the selling prices for the product. Neither of those cases involves an allegation that the Wheat Board exceeded its statutory mandate, as is alleged in this case. Upon considering the arguments of the parties, in light of the jurisprudence cited, I am not satisfied that it is beyond doubt that the Plaintiffs' claim in negligence will necessarily fail at trial.