[7]
The Guidelines state as follows under the heading "Processing Claims of Unaccompanied Children":
1.
Claims of unaccompanied children should be identified as soon as possible by Registry staff after referral to the CRDD
. The name of the child and any other relevant information should be referred to the provincial authorities responsible for child protection issues, if this has not already been done by Citizenship and Immigration Canada (CIC). After referral, all notices of hearings and pre-hearing conferences should be forwarded to the provincial authority.
2.
The CRDD panel and Refugee Claim Officer (RCO) should be immediately assigned to the claim and, to the extent possible, the same individuals should retain responsibility for the claim until completion
. It may also be necessary in some cases to assign an interpreter to the claim as early as possible so that the child can develop a relationship of trust with the interpreter. Before the panel, RCO and interpreter are assigned, consideration should be given to their experience in dealing with the claims of children.
. . . . .
4.
A designated representative for the child should be appointed as soon as possible following the assignment of the panel to the claim. This designation would usually occur at the pre-hearing conference referred to below, but it may be done earlier
. CRDD panels should refer to Section II above for guidelines on designating an appropriate representative. In determining whether a proposed representative is willing and able to act in the "best interests of the child", the panel should consider any relevant information received from the provincial authorities responsible for child protection as well as any relevant information from other reliable sources.
5.
A pre-hearing conference should be scheduled within 30 days of the receipt of the Personal Information Form (PIF). The purposes of the conference would include assigning the designated representative (if this has not already been done)
, identifying the issues in the claim, identifying the evidence to be presented and determining what evidence the child is able to provide and the best way to elicit that evidence. Information from individuals, such as the designated representative, medical practitioners, social workers, community workers and teachers can be considered when determining what evidence the child is able to provide and the best way to obtain the evidence. [underlining added, footnotes omitted]