[1]
Gibson, J.
: These reasons arise out of an application for judicial review of a decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division (the "CRDD") of the Immigration and Refugee Board, wherein the CRDD determined the applicant not to be a Convention refugee within the meaning of s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2. The decision of the CRDD is dated the 12th day of January, 1996.
[2]
The applicant is a citizen of El Salvador, by reason of his mother's nationality, and of Belize, by reason of his birth there on the 16th day of November, 1991. The applicant's mother, his designated representative, alleged before the CRDD a well-founded fear of persecution in El Salvador based on her membership in a particular social group. The applicant and an older sister alleged a fear of persecution in El Salvador by reason of their relationship to their mother. The applicant's mother and the two children were found to be Convention refugees as against El Salvador but the applicant herein, as a citizen of Belize, was found not to have a well-founded fear of persecution in that country.
[3]
In early 1991, the applicant's mother found herself caught between a powerful government supporter and the guerillas in El Salvador. She was raped by the government supporter. She became pregnant. The government supporter assumed the child might be his. He threatened both the mother and the unborn child. The mother fled with her young daughter. Shortly thereafter, she learned that her mother and maternal uncles had been killed and their house burned down.
[4]
The mother continued her flight into Belize where she gave birth to the applicant in a private home. From there she continued her flight to Mexico and eventually to Canada where she claimed Convention refugee status for herself and her two young children.
[5]
With reference to the applicant, the CRDD concluded in the following terms:
"In the case of Oscar Martinez however, while he has established a well-founded fear of persecution in El Salvador, based on the threats of death made by Carlos Amaya against his mother and the the unborn [sic] Oscar, he has not established that he has a well-founded fear of persecution in Belize, his country of birth. At the panel's request, counsel did obtain a statement from the Embassy of Belize to the United States of America, which states:
'He was born in Belize therefore he is considered a citizen of Belize'.
. . . . .
"Oscar Martinez has not established that he has a well-founded fear of persecution in Belize and he can avail himself of the protection of that country."
[6]
Counsel for the applicant argued before me that the CRDD erred in two respects, namely: first, in its determination of the applicant's claim to Convention refugee status without giving consideration to the application of the principle of family unity to the circumstances of the applicant; and second, in determining that the applicant had not established that he has a well-founded fear of persecution in Belize and can avail himself of the protection of that country, without analyzing submissions made on his behalf to the effect that citizens of El Salvador are discriminated against in Belize and the applicant has no effective, as opposed to formal, nationality in that country.
[7]
The principle of family unity is enunciated in The
Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status
[see footnote 1]. The following appears in Chapter VI of the
Handbook
under the heading "The Principle of Family Unity":
"182. The Final Act of the Conference that adopted the 1951 Convention:
Recommends Governments to take the necessary measures for the protection of the refugee's family, especially with a view to:
(1) Ensuring that the unity of the refugee's family is maintained particularly in cases where the head of the family has fulfilled the necessary conditions for admission to a particular country."
...
[8]
Counsel for the applicant urged that the definition "Convention refugee" in section 2 of the
Immigration Act
should be given a broad and liberal interpretation to respect the principle of family unity in the circumstances of this matter so that the applicant should have been determined to be a Convention refugee notwithstanding his formal attachment to Belize. I am satisfied that it is unnecessary to so extend the plain meaning of the words comprising the definition "Convention refugee". The principle of family unity is effectively enshrined in the
Immigration Act
on the facts of this case by ss. 46.04(1) and (3) which read in part as follows:
"46.04(1) Any person who is determined by the Refugee Division to be a Convention refugee may, within the prescribed period, apply to an immigration officer for landing of that person
and any dependant
of that person, unless the Convention refugee is
. . . . .
"(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, but subject to subss. (3.1) and (8), an immigration officer to whom an application is made under subs. (1)
shall grant landing
to the applicant,
and to any dependant
for whom landing is sought if the immigration officer is satisfied that neither the applicant nor any of those dependants is a person described in paragraph 19(1)(c.1), (c.2), (d), (e), (f), (g), (j), (k), or (l) or a person who has been convicted of an offence under any Act of Parliament for which a term of imprisonment of
(a) more than six months has been imposed; or
(b) five years or more may be imposed." (underlining added by me for emphasis)
None of the exceptions or limitations provided for in the two subsections in any way limit the applicant's mother's right to apply for landing in Canada for herself and the applicant, or the obligation of an immigration officer to grant landing in the event that such an application is made.
[9]
In
Rafizade v. Minister of Citizenship and Immigration
(1995), 92 F.T.R. 55; 30 Imm. L.R. (2d) 261 (T.D.), Mr. Justice Cullen stated:
"Although the principles of family unit and indirect persecution were not considered by two justices of the Trial Division to be elements of Canadian refugee law, the principles of family unity and indirect persecution are nevertheless subscribed to by virtue of s. 46.04 of the
Act
. This provision embraces the principle of family unity in that it allows a person who has been determined to be a Convention refugee to apply to an immigration officer for the landing of that person and any dependants ...
. . . . .
"Given Parliament's express intent to deal with family unit, I agree with the conclusions reached by Mr. Justice Nadon and Mr. Justice Rothstein and I can see no justification for the development of a common law notion of indirect persecution to account for family unit situations not covered by the section. Parliament has determined which family members qualify for admission and landing. It is not the role of the court to expand the scope of the family for immigration purposes beyond that which Parliament has determined to be appropriate" [see footnote 2].
[10]
I conclude that the applicant cannot succeed on the "family unity" argument made by counsel on his behalf.
[11]
I turn then, briefly, to the argument made by counsel to the effect that the CRDD failed to consider, or effectively analyze, the issue of whether or not the applicant had effective, as opposed to merely formal, national connection to Belize.
[12]
In
Canada (Attorney General) v. Ward
, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 689, at 754, Mr. Justice La Forest stated:
"Clearly, the inability of a second state of nationality to protect can be established where the claimant has actually approached the state and been denied protection. Where, as in the case of Ward, the second state has not actually been approached by the claimant, the principles delineated above regarding the home state should apply. In other words, Great Britain should be presumed capable of protecting its nationals."
The presumption highlighted by Mr. Justice La Forest applies with respect to Belize in the circumstances of this applicant.
[13]
James C. Hathaway, in
The Law of Refugee Status
[see footnote 3] states:
"The major caveat to the principle of deferring to protection by a state of citizenship is the need to ensure
effective
, rather than merely formal, nationality. It is not enough, for example, that the claimant carries a second passport from a non-persecutory state if that state is not
in fact
willing to afford protection against return to the country of persecution. While it is appropriate to presume a willingness on the part of a country of nationality to protect in the absence of evidence to the contrary, facts that call into question the existence of basic protection against return must be carefully assessed."
Some evidence calling into question the existence of basic protection for the applicant if returned to Belize, though not relating directly to the risk that he might then be returned from Belize to El Salvador, was put before the CRDD.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1994 on Belize
[see footnote 4] states:
"Belize is a multiracial, multiethnic country, and the Government actively promotes tolerance and cross-cultural understanding. Discrimination on ethnic or religious grounds is illegal and not common, although ethnic tension, particularly resentment of recently arrived Central American immigrants, continued to be a problem."
Counsel for the applicant, in written argument to the CRDD, took the position that, in light of this evidence, the applicant should be found to be a Convention refuge as against Belize. Before me, counsel argued that the CRDD dismissed this evidence and argument without giving it the "careful assessment" that Professor Hathaway suggests must be provided. In its reasons, the CRDD simply concludes, without reference to the evidence or argument, that the applicant "... has not established that he has a well-founded fear of persecution in Belize, his country of birth".
[14]
I conclude that, while a more careful assessment of the difficulties that the applicant might face if required to returned to Belize would have been appropriate, the mere failure by the CRDD to recite the evidence before it and the argument made to it on this issue is not a reviewable error. The CRDD's reasons, on their face, disclose that the CRDD did give consideration to the question of whether or not the applicant had a well-founded fear of persecution in Belize. In the result, the second argument presented on behalf of the applicant also fails.
[15]
In
Casetellanos et al. v. Canada (Solicitor General)
[see footnote 5], Mr. Justice Nadon certified a question in the following terms:
"Does the principle of family unity, as set out in the
Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status under the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Geneva, January 1988 - Ch. VI paragraphs 181-188, at pages 43-44, apply in the determination of Convention refugees under Canadian refugee law?:" [see footnote 6]
Counsel for the applicant requested that I certify the same question in this matter, particularly since, he advised the court, an appeal in
Casetellanos
is not being pursued. Counsel for the respondent recommended against certification of the proposed question or any other question. I decline to certify the question proposed since, as indicated earlier in these reasons, I am satisfied that the principle of family unity is effectively reflected in Canadian immigration law on the facts that are before me on this matter.
[16]
In the result, this application for judicial review will be dismissed. No question will be certified.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/slm
Footnotes
1.	Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, re-edited, Geneva, January 1992.
2.	See also
Casetellanos et al. v. Canada (Solicitor General)
, [1995] 2 F.C. 190; 189 F.T.R. 1 (T.D.) and
Pour-Shariati v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
, [1995] 1 F.C. 767; 89 F.T.R. 262 (T.D.)
3.	Butterworths, 1991, p. 59
4.	U.S. Department of State, February 1995, p. 324
5.	Supra, note 2.
6.	See [1995] 2 F.C. 211; 27 Imm. L.R.(2d) 187 (T.D.).
[End of document]
