[13]
"It [the evening] started as a normal day, 5:30 p.m. changeover ... I was in the gym for most of the night." Abbott had supper, returned to his cell located in Cell Block #1 which housed about 150 inmates. When gym was called he "headed down from the second floor to work out and just be out of the range". He believes it was around 5:30 p.m. and to the best of his recollection the gym "stays open until about 9:30 or 10:00 o'clock". He headed back about 9:20 p.m. to his cell block, and specifically to his cell to change from his sweaty shirt, later returning to the gym about 9:30 p.m. His particular reason for the second visit to the gym was to see a friend Steve Howard (Howard), and finally they left the gym about 10:00 p.m. Once gym is closed the inmates "are told to go back to the units". He was accompanied by Howard and each sent to their respective cells on the second floor. His intention was to have a shower but they were taken so, "I GRABBED BY BUTTER KNIFE AND PEANUT BUTTER AND WENT TO MAKE SOME TOAST" (reason for my emphasis will be referred to later). He was going "to make a sandwich for me and him while Howard was taking a shower and then I was going to take my shower". We were advised that the toaster is at the front of the range on the first floor. When he was next to the toaster, "they [officer or guard] had call pill parade", not with any P.A. system but simply "yelled it out". You must be on prescribed medication to go and get your pills. Abbott went from the toaster to the pill parade taking "the butter knife with me ... because if you leave things lying around people will take it. There is a hundred and some odd people on the range". Also, this was a prized commodity because "they give out camping gear now, butter knives that bend when you are buttering your toast and spoons like camping gear". Abbott's knife was "the old butter knives
that they used to give the inmates
(this was confirmed by a guard in evidence), more stable and more durable". (my emphasis). On his way to the pill parade:
"Q.	Did you go to pill parade with this butter knife in your hand?
A.	No.
Q.	Where was the butter knife?
A.	It was in my pants, my pajamas [sic]"