[56]
Gautreau's evidence is that Abbott when leaving the toaster area, put the knife in his back pocket and remembering that, said to Abbott: "Have you still got that butter knife on you? With all this shit going down you had better get rid of it. ... I wasn't paying attention to Kevin after that because my partner Dave Dunn, he was screaming at me to get back in the block [#1]. He knew the guys were coming." He made it back to the entrance before there was any shooting and confirmed that two shots were fired:
"Q.	Did you see them fired?
A.	I seen the first one fired.
Q.	Where was it fired from?
A.	From the barrier ... which was locked."
and he identified Carl Decker as the shooter and that he was on the north side of the locked barrier. All entrances of the cell blocks were closed and:
"We were yelling at Mr. Dickson [a guard in cell block 1] to open the barrier and let us in. I guess he felt some of us might be participants or something. I don't know what he felt but in any case he wasn't opening the barrier and I knew they were coming with guns."
He then described what happened:
"Then I heard, 'clear the strip' a few time and then I heard the shot. ... There is a vestibule that covers a barrier at the other end of the strip [south end]. ... You could hide right in there, right in around the corner there and possible not get shot. ... That is the barrier, but right there where the bubble that goes around. ... That goes out into the strip approximately four feet, that vestibule which would mean you could hide on the other side of that and not get shot. So, from 1 block, I couldn't get in there. I attempted to run to 4 block as fast as I could and when I looked down, I see he was still on the other side of barrier. So, I figured since he is on the other side of the barrier, I could still make it to 4 block. I didn't hear, 'Get down. Hit the strip' or nothing. All I heard was, 'Clear the strip', and I was trying to get the fuck off the strip. Excuse my language.
Anyway, I ran and got hit half-way. I don't even think I made it half-way. I think I got off the wall a little bit and got hit.
. . . . .
Q.	Were you struck by the first shot?
A.	Yes I was.
Q.	Did you hear or see a second shot?
A.	I heard a second shot.
Q. 	What happened to you after the first shot?
A.	I froze.
Q.	Did you hit the ground?
A.	No. I froze. I got about 40 or 50 pellets in the leg, but I just froze. I was just shocked that I got hit.
. . . . .
Q.	What happened
after
the second shot was fired?
A.	Most of the guys were hitting the ground because after the first shot was fired, they were yelling, 'Get down. Get down on your face or on your hands.' Anyway, 'Hit the deck. Get down. Everybody down. Put your hands behind your head.' I hit the floor. The officers ran up." (emphasis added)
At this stage Decker and several other officers, some of them armed with shotguns or mace, had moved in to take charge.