[62]
Ramos was the first witness called by the defendant. He is an employee of the Correctional Services of Canada (CSC) with 10 years experience. His duties are described as keeping control of the institution, security, control of keys, dynamic posts within the institution, which means a control post at the main gate, cell block, control centre, where you can control movement of inmates. He was working the 3:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. shift at Collins Bay on the 17th of November 1986. He was observing the pill parade at the cell block control centre. The number of inmates on the strip is controlled, for example, by letting unit 1 and 4 go at the same time but not units 2 and 3.
"Q.	Where were you standing monitoring pill parade?
A.	Outside of unit #3, there is a water fountain on the west wall and I was between the fountain and the barrier."
Also there, as a monitor, was Luc Richer (Richer) who was beside Ramos and to his left.
"Q.	Can you describe what happened, please Mr. Ramos?
A.	We were observing the medication parade. The inmates line up right beside the cell block control centre across the hall from us and the nurse hands them their medication through the barrier. They turn, some of them usually come over to the water fountain and get a drink, and proceed down the strip back to their units.
. . . . .
A.	Cell blocks. At some point I noticed that one inmate, inmate Sharp came along the cell block barrier trying to get in behind Mr. Richer.
Q.	When you say the 'cell block barrier' which barrier do you mean, specifically? Do you mean to cell block 3?
A.	The cell block control barrier. The one that the nurse is handing the pills from.
. . . . .
A.	At that moment I realized something wasn't right because, as I said before, the inmates usually turn, maybe go to the water fountain and get a drink and down the strip. He was too far over towards us. So, I reached out with my right hand and was just in the process of going to say, 'What are you doing?' or 'Why are you over here?' and Mr. Richer also felt movement and turned. I noticed that there was a shiv, a knife in Abbott's -- sorry -- Sharp's left hand.
Q.	Who is Sharp?
A.	Who is Sharp? He is an inmate housed in cell block No. 1. ... When Mr. Richer turned, he grabbed Sharp's left hand which the weapon was in and pulled it down towards the floor. I reached in and also grabbed his hand and tried ---. ... His left hand.
Q.	Of Mr. Sharp?
A.	M'hm.
Q.	Where was his right hand?
A.	He tried to grab Mr. Richer around the throat area and was in the process of bringing the shiv towards his throat. Mr. Richer turned at the point, grabbed his hand, as I say."
In light of all the evidence I do not believe the above portion of the scenario.
Also, it sounded too manufactured.
"Q.	Grabbed whose hand? Can you make it very clear?
A.	Sharp's hand. I reached in and grabbed his hand also that the shiv was in and pulled it towards the floor.
Q.	When you say 'reached in', what do you mean 'reached in'?
A.	I grabbed his hand. I reached in and grabbed his hand and pulled it towards the floor. I had to go around Mr. Richer to get to Mr. Sharp, because they were in that -- they were along the west wall, right in the corner, where the barrier meets the wall at that point.
Q.	Were Richer and Sharp standing at this point in time?
A.	Yes, they were both standing.
Q.	Then what happened, please?
A.	Then somebody yelled, "He has a knife.' Officer McCormick who was on the north side of the barrier towards the main gate appeared, realized that something wasn't right immediately. He ran down and through the barrier, the east end of the north side of the barrier on the north wall. He reached in and also grabbed the knife.
Q.	I am sorry, I have lost my sense of direction here.
A.	Officer McCormick appeared on this side of the barrier coming down the strip.
Q.	Okay. On the north side?
A.	Yes, Officer McCormick reached in, also grabbed the knife and we wrestled it away from inmate Sharp.
Q.	Where were you at this point?
A.	Still in the corner.
Q.	Then what happened?
A.	Officer McCormick had the knife and I heard it hit the floor. So, I heard it hit the floor. I don't know whether he dropped it.
Q.	Do you know where it hit the floor?
A.
On the north side of the barrier
." (emphasis added)
Then Ramos added:
"Q.	What happened after you got the knife away from Sharp?
A.	Just as we got the knife away from Sharp, I heard someone yell, 'Let go of him or I will kill you'.
Q.	Do you know who that was?
A.	When I first heard it, no. I turned around to the voice and it was inmate Chater.
Q.	What was inmate Chater doing?
A.	Inmate Chater was coming towards me. He had a shiv in each hand and he started to swing his arms with the shivs in his hands."