[94]
Most damaging to the conduct of the prison staff before the incident was their evidence solicited during cross-examination:
"Q.	You are briefed before you come on duty? Were you briefed as to the problems that Officer Small brought to the attention of his supervisors?
A.	No, sir, we weren't.
Q.	I am going to ask you to turn to Annex M-2, page 102. Are you saying that you were never briefed with respect to the recommendations of your colleague? Let me highlight parts of this letter:
'We definitely have a problem with #1 Block with brew for the last two nights. Cons are drunk. The smell of brew very prevalent on all ranges. Someone is going to get hurt.'
If that isn't an accurate foreshadowing from one of your colleagues, I don't know what is. Would you agree with me that Officer Small was pretty accurate, wasn't he?
A.	Yes, sir.
Q.	You weren't -- you are telling this Court that you weren't advised, prior to your shift, as to any potential problems?
A.	I was advised by Mr. Decker to keep an eye on the strip, as they [sic] may be a problem. But, he did not advise me as in particular what was to raise the problem, or where the problem would arise from, or what the circumstances were.
Q.	Now, I am going to ask you to turn to page 40 of the report, in paragraph 26. Now, these are comments by the authors of the report after all of these statements are in:
'During the 48 hour period prior to the incident, staff on #1 Block were conscious of and reported the presence of intoxicants ...'
Likely based on Officer Small and later:
'A recommendation had been put forth from Block Officers that a thorough search be conducted ... however, this was not carried out ... frustration was detected during interviews with he Officers who made the recommendations that it had apparently been ignored and this inaction may have contributed to the incident under investigation.'
"Do you have knowledge of that?
A.	The request was made for the search and all that?
Q.	Correct.
A.	No, I don't but that is not the only problem we have had with management.
Q.	It is an ongoing problem with management which may have contributed very much to Mr. Abbott's shooting and other inmates; would you agree with that?
A.	It may have, yes."