[99]
Christy advised that after an incident a preliminary report is prepared under the direction of the Warden, with the actual work being done by the Institutional Preventive Security Officer. If the warden is satisfied that is the end of it. Here, however, "we were asked specifically in this case to deal with the propriety of the discharge of the weapon". Christy pointed out quite early:
"Q.	Roughly, your mandate sir?
A.	To review the circumstances surrounding the incident, leading up to the incident, to determine what took place, but with a view to make recommendations to reduce the risk of reoccurrence. It is an administrative investigation. It is not a criminal investigation. ... Our mandate is to make recommendations to improve the management of the Service."
And later:
"Q.	Did you have any particular mindset going into this investigation, sir?
A.	... I wouldn't call it a mindset, but were knew that the major issue, at the beginning of our investigation, was whether or not the discharge of the weapon was justified. We had an open mind about that."
Christy's report concluded:
"... the use of firearms by CS5 Decker was warranted in the circumstances under investigation and was effective in preventing continued lethal attacks on staff members and discouraged the intentions of several other inmates who may have intended to create a disturbance following the initial aggressive action ..."
My main concern with the Christy report is a point made by counsel for the plaintiff, namely, throughout Christy's evidence his use of the word "we":
"A.	I fell we generated a fair and unbiased report.
Q.	When then do you, when you are referring to -- I am referring to your answers in chief say 'we'? You said on a number of occasions towards the end, for example, 'We wanted to take control of the penitentiary', and 'We faced a large number of inmates'. Would you agree with me that an author of an apparently fair and unbiased report using the word 'we', that doesn't give the impression, does it, of being an unbiased report? You are talking of the first person singular.
A.	The concept that a member of the Correctional Service of Canada can generate a fair and unbiased report and still see himself as a member of the Correctional Service of Canada does not strike me as being inconsistent.
Q.	Again, I ask you, why are you using the phrase 'We wanted to control the penitentiary'?
A.	I was speaking as a member of the Service at that point, I guess."