[129]
I have made the following determination:
1. Abbott was a credible witness but clearly mistaken that he was hit by the first shot.
2. He did head toward the pill parade line, saw an altercation, turned around and walked away from it.
3. His knife was not a weapon, not intended to be one and was not sharpened to make it a shiv. He did put it in his waist band, it was knocked out when a guard ran past him and he did place it in a garbage can as alleged.
4. He was moving toward cell block 1, not running. He did remove himself from the main group along the east wall so he wouldn't be seen as being part of any altercation.
5. Abbott was unable to get back inside cell block 1 or into any other cell block because they were closed and locked.
6. As he moved from the garbage can area on the strip near cell block 2 to cross the strip his back was to the shooter Decker and it was the second shot that hit him.
7. I believe him when he states the only warning he heard was to "clear the range" that this happened before Decker came on the scene, but he did not hear any other warning due to the pandemonium created by the incident.
8. I accept that he was maced at a time
when he was wounded, carrying no weapons and down on the floor where he provided no threat;
9. Ramos stated Abbott was not involved and the message got across immediately when only Chater and Sharp were "arrested" and taken to Keeper's Hall.
10. Decker fired two shots and the second shot was absolutely unnecessary because no guard remained on the strip but all were safe and secure in the locked cell blocks.
11. Decker had to know the effect of firing the shotgun because they were "used for their spread", and must have realized he was bound to wound/hurt inmates not involved in the altercation. I'm prepared to accept he may have shouted a warning but clearly it was not heard, and the second shot came very soon after the first shot.
12. I accept that the first shot was a warning shot and fired into the plaster-coated ceiling and that probably no one was injured by this shot.
13. Quick medical treatment was given to Abbott both at the institution and at Hotel Dieu (hospital) in Kingston.
14. I cannot accept there was a need to place Abbott in segregation on his return from hospital when everyone knew immediately that the inmates were subdued in the strip, that Abbott was not involved and Ramos even said so. Both Abbott and the institution security people believed Abbott would be returned to his cell. If Abbott thought or even had an inkling that he would go from the hospital to segregation he most assuredly would have insisted on remaining at the hospital for further treatment rather than spend it in segregation.
15. Fontaine and Gautreau were wrong. The barrier where pills were provided was open and Decker, along with Forrest, went through the barrier following which the shots were fired.
16. Crisp acted cooly, responsibly and effectively by standing on the strip and ordering five inmates back to cell block 1, unlocking the cell block 2 to allow six officers to escape from Chater and Sharp and then locking it again. I believe Chater did try to stab her through the bars causing her to fall back but she was in no danger after that. Also, her quick response requiring Abbott and others to lie face down was commendable, and she heard and replied to obscene epithets from Abbott. She did not mace Abbott but another guard did.
17. Forrest also acted admirably and bravely when he accompanied Decker on to the strip. Yes, it would have been safer and possibly more appropriate to secure another shotgun, or mace, or handcuffs, but his response was a courageous one. (Evidence is that Decker gave him handcuffs and mace but Forrest cannot remember that happening.)
18. Decker's initial reaction may have been correct but once armed and firing a harmless warning shot into the ceiling, no further shooting was warranted. The guards were not on the strip; 7-10 guards were available to subdue Chater and Sharp; no guards were in danger in the locked cells and only later did guards volunteer that Dickson was in a ticklish or dangerous situation in cell block 4, due to the presence of prisoners in the cubicle forcing him to the bars within reach of Chater and Sharp's knives. A shotgun simply pointed 	at them was enough to have them return to their cells.
19. I accept that Gautreau was butted with a gun and maced when it wasn't necessary. It was anger and over-reaction similar to the macing of Abbott.
20. At least 61 pellets went into Abbott's body, primarily on the legs. With the amount of ricocheting that was bound to occur and in fact did occur, it's not surprising that one pellet or so may have found its way into Abbott's foot.
21. (a) Two procedures or similar procedures were followed resulting in Abbott's segregation and involuntary transfer and a recommendation SHU;
(b) The directives required Abbott to rebut the allegations within 48 hours and he wrote that rebuttal. The warden directed the matter up the chain to the regional director and he of course was not on the scene and so had to determine from the Notice and the Rebuttal whether segregation and later involuntary transfer were appropriate. I said earlier no witness was guilty of a bald-faced lie but whoever did all of this paperwork and carried out the process certainly was.
In Exhibit 1, Tab 9 the following was reported:
"Inmate Abbott was on the strip at that time and had been seen by Correctional Officers to have been trying to get rid of a weapon (a butter knife) by throwing the knife behind the garbage pail when the shots were fired. Abbott was also seen chasing guards down the strip as the two officers who were attacked with knives were trying to escape and get onto the security of a block. Abbott, among others, was seen chasing the guards down the strip in an apparent attempt to stop the officers from getting to the blocks. It is believed by the institution and the OPP that Abbott was involved in a conspiracy to overtake the prison. We have also been informed that the OPP will be charging Abbott with
Criminal Code
offences for his part in the incident. It should be noted that Abbott was struck in the leg area with pellets from the discharged shotgun so it is quite apparent that he was on the strip during the incident mentioned above."
That information was carried forward into Exhibit #1, Tab 10 where it was summarized as follows:
"Abbott was involved in a main disturbance where inmates were attempting to take staff hostage, murder staff, take over the prison. Weapons were involved. Disturbance quelled by shotgun firing by CX staff."
Then, at Tab 12 of Exhibit 1:
"Abbott was involved in a serious incident at CBI. OPP are laying charges. A transfer to S-6 is being requested immediately to remove Abbott from further disruptions at CBI.
"Subject was seen at the time of the major incident at CBI with a knife. He discarded it and began chasing officers up and down the strip. He is to be charged by OPP with respect to this incident."
And then again on December 12th in the Notice to Abbott of segregation we see the words (Tab 14):
"Because of your involvement in an incident at Collins Bay Penitentiary."
And again at Tab 15:
"I have reason to believe that your presence in our open population would be detrimental to the good order of our institution, at this time pending your involvement in an incident at Collins Bay Institution."
Similarly, at Tab 16:
"Subject was transferred to M.I. [Millhaven Institution] as a result of his involvement in an incident at C.B.I. [Collins Bay Institution] Incident is currently under investigation."
Also, at Tab 17:
"Subject was admitted involuntarily to Millhaven segregation after transfer from Collins Bay where he was involved in a major institution incident which is under investigation."
And the final indignity, a letter to Abbott from Pat Ryan, Regional Manager Offender Management dated December 8, 1986 and referred to earlier in these reasons. (Exhibit 1, Tab 19).
In the final analysis, having been charged with possession of weapon dangerous to public peace, Abbott was placed in involuntary segregation. Eventually the real cruncher (Tab 32):
"You are to remain in administrative segregation pending recommendation/decision for transfer to Special Handling Unit by Collins Bay Institution staff."
(c) My conclusion after examining all the paper work involved resulting in segregation, involuntary transfer and an attempted SHU for Abbott is that the O.P.P. were way out of line to lay charges for possession of dangerous weapon. An institution report had cleared Abbott of any involvement. My suspicion that this was not one of the O.P.P.'s finest hours increased when I heard that all charges were dropped the day he was to go to trial. Someone, somewhere was being malicious.
(d) To add to this unfair treatment, Abbott was kept in segregation for another two weeks. Reason - "we are awaiting a pending investigation". The only
pending investigation
seems to be one in support of the application for a SHU for Abbott. If the charges by the O.P.P. were dropped no case would possibly be made for SHU. This was not a good day for justice in the prison system.