[149]
At page 450 of
Canadian Tort Law
, Linden outlines the traditional requirements to establish the defence of voluntary assumption of risk as:
"'(1) that the plaintiff clearly knew and appreciated the nature and character of the risk he ran, and (2) that he voluntarily incurred it' [footnote omitted]. In other words, it had to be demonstrated that the plaintiff not only 'perceived the existence of the danger, but also fully appreciated it and voluntarily assumed the risk, and that is a question of fact'. [footnote omitted]
"Consequently, if there is no knowledge of the danger, there can be no assumption of risk ... In addition, the risk must be freely encountered. When there is no free choice .. there is no volenti."
Linden continues at pages 451 and 452 to discuss the narrowing of the definition by the Supreme Court of Canada. He states at page 451 that:
"More recently the Supreme Court of Canada has reshaped the doctrine of volenti non fit injuria so as to restrict its application to instances where the court finds an agreement, express or implied, to exempt the defendant from liability. [footnote omitted] Demonstrative of the rather hostile judicial attitude toward the defence of volenti is
Lagasse v. Rural Municipality of Richot
, [footnote omitted] where the plaintiff's late husband, a tractor operator, agreed to plow some snow on a lake at the request of the defendant municipality. While plowing the snow, the ice gave way and the tractor sank into the lake, drowning the plaintiff's husband. In deciding if volenti non fit injuria applied, Matas, J., quoted the statement of Denning, M.R., in
Nettleship v. Weston
...
"Matas, J., concluded:
'Nothing in [the deceased's] words or conduct, either express or by necessary implication, showed that he gave a real consent to the assumption of risk without compensation or that he absolved the defendants from the duty to take care.'" [footnote omitted]
Similarly it is my view that there was nothing in the plaintiff's conduct, either express or implied, which showed that he gave a real consent to the assumption or risk or that he absolved the defendant's servants from the duty to take care.