[165]
I am also of the view that the case before me without a doubt warrants an award of exemplary or punitive damages and in this regard Muldoon, J.'s, comments at pages 608 and 609 F.C. of
LeBar
bear repeating:
"Exemplary damages are those which are also called 'punitive', 'aggravated', 'retributory' and according to Linden (Op. cit., page 51) even 'vindictive and penal'. Such a varied, but single-minded and strong nomenclature certainly conveys the judicial intention to denounce the defendant's misconduct. Although keeping the plaintiff unlawfully for 43 days after his 20 years of imprisonment, excepting periods of being unlawfully at large, could hardly inflict any additional humiliation or loss of reputation upon him, it did constitute oppressive, arbitrary and fundamentally unconstitutional conduct by servants of the defendant. In this country where liberty is a constitutional, albeit conditionally, protected individual right and societal value, it is not tolerable to treat even this self-cheapened liberty, or anyone else's precious liberty, with insouciant disregard.
. . . . .
"Their negligence and their oppressive and wilful or wanton disregard of the plaintiff's right to be released were amply abusive to support the award of exemplary damages. Despite reasonably timely notification, they persisted in deliberately detaining him in prison until the day before his motion for a mandatory injunction was returnable on this court in September 1982. Unjustified by any explanation, their misconduct is legally unjustifiable.
"Here in the matter of exemplary damages, the taxpayers again will have to pay but now a more substantial assessment, for the misconduct of the defendant's servants. This task is not an exact science. The assessment of exemplary damages must be an adequate disapproval of those servants' reprehensible misconduct in ignoring the law whose authoritative interpretation was clearly signalled to them, and in oppressively, abusively and deliberately disregarding the plaintiff's right to regain his conditional liberty and liberation from unlawful imprisonment. In light of the jurisprudence, which unfortunately for the assessor of damages, does not present any exactly, or even nearly, similar situation, the court awards the plaintiff the sum of $10,000 exemplary damages."