[5]
The Exchequer Court of Canada was the predecessor to the Federal Court of Canada. By virtue of subsection 4(1) of the
Exchequer Court Act
, R.S.C. 1952, c. 98 as amended, the Exchequer Court consisted of the president and six puisne judges. From the inception of the Exchequer Court until its dissolution and replacement by the Federal Court, its governing statute provided for the office of a Registrar or Master to assist in its work. The history of the office of Registrar or Master of the Exchequer Court was reviewed by Isaac, C.J., (as he then was) in his dissenting opinion in
Canada v. Aqua-Gem Investments Ltd.
, [1993] 2 F.C. 425; 149 N.R. 273 (C.A.), at pp. 438 to 439 in footnote 5, as follows:
"The office of Registrar has existed since the founding of the Court. Initially, the position of Registrar of both the Supreme Court of Canada and the Exchequer Court was occupied by the same individual (
The Supreme and Exchequer Courts Act
, S.C. 1875, c. 11, s. 70), but in 1887, the position of Registrar of the Exchequer Court was constituted as a separate office (
An Act to amend "The Supreme and Exchequer Courts Act", and to make better provision for the Trial of Claims against the Crown
, S.C. 1887, c. 16, s. 9). Like the prothonotaries in this Court, the Registrar of the Exchequer Court was required to be a barrister.
"The constituent authority for the office of Registrar had to be amended periodically to provide for an increase in salary until, by [
An Act to amend the Exchequer Court Act
] S.C. 1957, c. 24, s. 1, his salary was thereafter to be determined by the Governor-in-Council, but the express authorization for the exercise of judicial authority by him was enacted by [
An Act to amend the Exchequer Court Act
] S.C. 1920, c. 26, s. 3. It added a new subs. 13(2) to the
Act
, which provided:
'13. ...
(2) In addition to any powers, jurisdic­tion and authority conferred upon the Registrar by this or any other statute of Canada, the judges of the Exchequer Court of Canada may, by any general rule or order made under the provisions of section eighty-seven of this Act [i.e., the provision which authorized the judges of the Court to make rules], empower the Registrar to do any such thing and transact any such business as is specified in such rules or orders, and to exercise any authority and jurisdiction in respect of the same as is now or may be hereafter done, transacted or exercised by a Judge of the Court sitting in Chambers in virtue of any statute or custom or by the practice of the Court.'
"In the 1927 revision of the public general statutes [
Exchequer Court Act
, R.S.C. 1927, c. 34] this provision was incorpo­rated (with slight grammatical modifica­tions of no consequence to this case) as ss. 87(2), where it remained throughout the remainder of the life of the Exchequer Court (see
Exchequer Court Act
, R.S.C. 1952, c. 98). In their last form prior to the creation of this Court, the 'semi-judicial powers', as they were entitled, were embodied in
Exchequer Court General Rules and Orders
, Rule 1A. By virtue of Rule 1A(4), the Registrar could be referred to as the Master of the Court."