[7]
The
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1970, c. 10 (2nd Supp.) ("
Federal Court Act
, 1970") came into force on June 1, 1971. It con­tinued and expanded the jurisdiction of the Exchequer Court in the newly created Fed­eral Court, a court composed of two divi­sions, namely the Court of Appeal and the Trial Division. By virtue of subsection 5(1) of the
Federal Court Act
, 1970, the Court consisted of the judges specified in that provision. The
Federal Court Act
, 1970 did not continue the office of Registrar or Mas­ter in the manner in which that office had existed in the Exchequer Court; rather, it provided for the appointment by the Gov­ernor-in-Council of prothonotaries in circum­stances where their assistance was "necessary for the efficient performance of the work of the Court". The powers, duties and functions of the prothonotaries were to be determined by the Rules. Section 12 provided as follows in relation to prothonotaries:
"12(1) The Governor-in-Council may appoint as prothonotaries of the Court such fit and proper persons who are barristers or advocates in any of the provinces as are, in his opinion, necessary for the efficient performance of the work of the Court that, under the Rules, is to be performed by them.
"(2) The Governor-in-Council shall desig­nate one of the prothonotaries to be Senior Prothonotary and one of the prothonotaries to be Associate Senior Prothonotary.
"(3) The powers, duties and functions of the prothonotaries shall be determined by the Rules.
"(4) Each prothonotary shall be paid a salary to be fixed by the Governor-in-Council.
"(5) For the purposes of the
Public Service Superannuation Act
, a prothonotary shall be deemed to be employed in the Public Service."
"12(1) Le gouverneur en conseil peut nommer à titre de protonotaires de la Cour les personnes qualifiées et compétentes, choisies parmi les avocats de l'une ou l'autre des provinces, dont les services sont, à son avis, nécessaires pour l'expédi­tion efficace des travaux de la Cour as­signés aux protonotaires en vertu des Règ­les.
"(2) Le gouverneur en conseil désigne deux des protonotaires pour assumer re­spectivement les fonctions de protonotaire-chef et de protonotaire-chef adjoint.
"(3) Les pouvoirs et fonctions des protono­taires sont déterminés par les Règles.
"(4) Chaque protonotaire perçoit un traite­ment fixé par le gouverneur en conseil.
"(5) Aux fins de la
Loi sur la pension de la Fonction publique
, un protonotaire est censé être à l'emploi de la Fonction publique."