[9]
Under the authority of paragraph 46(1)(h) of the
Federal Court Act
, 1970, the judges of the Court made the former
Federal Court Rules
, SOR/71-68 as amended, including Rule 336 dealing with prothonotaries. Former Rules 336(1), (2) and (5) dealt with, respectively, the specific jurisdiction to be exercised by prothonotaries, the referral of matters back to the Court for disposition or directions and the avenue of appeal. For the purposes of the present motion, it is unnecessary to describe in any detail the jurisdiction exercised by prothonotaries under the regime in the for­mer
Federal Court Rules
. However, it is important to note that former Rule 336 did not restrict the jurisdiction of prothonotaries to matters in the Trial Division, but was broadly worded to permit the exercise of jurisdiction in matters arising in either the Trial Division or the Court of Appeal. In practice, prothonotaries only exercised their jurisdiction in matters in the Trial Division. However, the fact that their jurisdiction was not restricted solely to matters in the Trial Division was made clear by the appeal provision in former Rule 336(5) which provided as follows:
"336(5) Any person affected by an order or decision of a prothonotary, other than a judgment under Rules 432 to 437, may appeal therefrom to the Court and such appeal shall be made by an application of which a notice shall be given to all inter­ested parties setting forth the grounds of objection and served within 14 days after the order or decision complained of, and 4 clear days before the day fixed for hearing the same, or served within such other time as may be allowed by the Court or a prothonotary on ex parte application. The appeal shall be filed not later than 2 days before the date named for hearing (In this paragraph, 'Court' means 'Trial Division', if the matter is in the Trial Division, and 'Court of Appeal', if the matter is in the Court of Appeal)."
"336(5) Toute personne concernée par une ordonnance ou décision d'un protonotaire, autre qu'un jugement en vertu des Règles 432 à 437, peut en appeler à la Cour et cet appel doit être interjeté au moyen d'une demande dont avis doit être donné à toutes la parties intéressées, ledit avis devra indi­quer les raisons de l'opposition et être signifié dans les 14 jours de l'ordonnance ou de la décision dont il est fait appel, et 4 jours francs avant le jour fixé pour l'audi­tion de l'appel, ou devra être signifié dans tel autre délai que pourra accorder la Cour ou un protonotaire sur demande ex parte. L'appel doit être déposé 2 jours au moins avant la date fixée pour l'audition. (Au présent alinéa, 'Cour' désigne la 'Division de première instance', si la question est devant la Division de première instance, et la 'Cour d'appel', si la question est de la Cour d'appel)."