[2]
The Appeal Board whose decision is here under attack was the third appointed to deal with appeals launched by either or both of the applicants in respect of the same closed competition, the closing date for which was January 21, 1994. A first appeal, decided in July 1995, was allowed on the basis that there were significant knowledge requirements for the job which had not been assessed by the Selection Board. Following that decision, the Public Service Commission expressed the view that some of the requisite knowledge had in fact already been sufficiently, albeit indirectly, assessed and directed the Selection Board to conduct a further assessment of the candidates with regard only to some aspects of the required knowledge. As a result of that assessment, a new eligibility list was issued which did not differ in any respect material to this application from the one which had been issued previously. This led to a second appeal which was allowed by an Appeal Board in March 1996 on the grounds that it was not open to the Commission to decide, contrary to the findings of the first Appeal Board, that part of the requisite knowledge had already been assessed and that a new assessment would accordingly be undertaken with respect to only some aspects of the required knowledge. As a result of that decision, the Commission ordered a further assessment of those aspects of knowledge which had not been directly assessed following the first Appeal Board decision. This was done by administering a written examination to the four candidates on the existing eligibility list. The result was the issuance of a new eligibility list in June 1996 listing the same four candidates in the same order as before. That, in turn, gave rise to a third appeal by both the present applicants, one of whom had been found not qualified and the other of whom was placed last on the list. The Appeal Board appointed to hear that appeal allowed it with regard to certain relatively minor aspects which are not now in issue but dismissed it insofar as it sought to attack the appointment of the two candidates who had been successful from the outset of the competition and had been appointed to and had continued to hold the positions in question since prior to the hearing of the first appeal. Hence, the present application.