[20]
Sopinka, J., discussed the third rationale at p. 362:
"The third underlying rationale of the mootness doctrine is the need for the court to demonstrate a measure of awareness of its proper law-making function. The court must be sensitive to its role as the adjudicative branch in our political framework. Pronouncing judgments in the absence of a dispute affecting the rights of the parties may be viewed as intruding into the role of the legislative branch."
He then went on to discuss how in
Borowski
, supra, the third criteria would be conclusive with respect to exercising judicial discretion. He stated at p. 365,
"[e]ven if I were disposed in favour of the appellant in respect to the first two factors which I have canvassed, I would decline to exercise a discretion in favour of deciding this appeal on the basis of the third. One element of this third factor is the need to demonstrate some sensitivity to the effectiveness or efficacy of judicial intervention. The need for courts to exercise some flexibility in the application of the mootness doctrine requires more than a consideration of the importance of the subject matter. The appellant is requesting a legal opinion on the interpretation of the
Canadian Charter
of Rights and Freedoms
in the absence of legislation or other governmental action which would otherwise bring the
Charter
into play. This is something only the government may do. What the appellant seeks is to turn this appeal into a private reference. Indeed, he is not seeking to have decided the same question that was the subject of his action. That question related to the validity of s. 251 of the
Criminal Code
. He now wishes to ask a question that relates to the
Canadian Charter
of Rights and Freedoms
alone. This is not a request to decide a moot question but to decide a different, abstract question. To accede to this request would intrude on the right of the executive in order to reference and pre-empt a possible decision of Parliament by dictating the form of legislation it should enact. To do so would be a marked departure from the traditional role of the court."
In the case before me I am concerned with an allegation of proposed government action. However, what the applicants are really seeking at the end of the day is a legal opinion on some agreement which may occur after negotiations take place somewhere. As in
Borowski
, the applicants are seeking to turn this application into a private reference.