[18]
In
Mohammad v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
, [1989] 2 F.C. 363; [1988] F.C.J. No. 2241; 91 N.R. 121 (F.C.A.), the Federal Court of Appeal determined that it is not a pre-condition to the operation of paragraph 19.(1)(c.1) (then 19(1)(c)) that the Governor in Council (now the minister) should have considered the question of rehabilitation and made a decision in that respect. Justice Heald said at page 371:
"On the facts of this case, the submission is that the immigration officer authorizing the section 27 report did not have , as of January 20, 1988, information in her possession from which she could conclude that the appellant, if he were an immigrant, would not be granted landing because the information in her possession did not include information as to whether the appellant had satisfied the Governor in Coucil as to his rehabilitation and that since such information is an essential element of the information which the immigration officer must possess when making the report, the absence therefore is fatal to the validity of the report. I am unable to accept this submission. Implicit in the appellant's argument is the assumption that persons who have satisfied the Governor in Council as to their rehabilitation are not members of the inadmissible class described in paragraph 19(1)(c). I do not subscribe to this view of the matter. In my opinion, the exemption provided in paragraph 19(1)(c) describes members of the class who will not be granted admission, i.e. those members who have not satisfied the Governor in Council as to their rehabilitation. It does not, however, in my view, narrow the class encompassed by paragraph 19(1)(c). The report mandated by subsection 27(1) requires the authorizing immigration officer to possess information that the person concerned has been convicted of the kind of criminal act specified in paragraph 19(1)(c) and to have knowledge that the person concerned has not satisfied the Governor in Council as to his or her rehabilitation.
It is unnecessary, in my view, for the officer to wait for a decision as to rehabilitation before issuing the report. The section only requires that the issuing officer be satisfied that no decision of satisfaction by the Governor in Council has been made at the time when that officer comes into possession of the information relating to the conviction. Accordingly, I am in agreement with the view expressed by counsel for the respondents that it is not a pre-condition to the operation of paragraph 19(1)(c) that the Governor in Council shall have considered the question of rehabilitation and be not satisfied that the person concerned has brought himself within the exception
. I would, therefore, reject this submission." (My Emphasis)