[1]
Richard, J.
: This proceeding was commenced by an originating notice of motion filed on June 1, 1993, in which the applicants made an application to the court, pursuant to s. 55.2 of the
Patent Act
, s. 6 of the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance)
Regulations
and rules 319 and 321.1 of the
Federal Court Rules
, for the purpose of obtaining an order prohibiting the respondent, the Minister of National Health and Welfare (the "Minister"), from issuing to Apotex Inc. a notice of compliance for the medicine norfloxacin until after the expiration of Canadian Patents Nos. 1,178,961 and 1,214,466. The applicants filed the affidavit of W.H. Guy Saheb along with the notice of motion.
[2]
By order of this court dated June 10, 1993, Apotex Inc. was added as a respondent to the application.
[3]
The court file indicates that the parties have brought fifteen interlocutory motions in this proceeding since June 1, 1993. The applicants filed their application record including their memorandum of fact and law on September 27, 1994. Apotex Inc. responded by filing a notice of motion on October 19, 1994, for an order directing that certain items be struck and removed from the applicants' application record and from the applicants' memorandum of fact and law.
[4]
There are now three motions which have been made returnable before the court at this time:
1) a motion by Apotex Inc. for an order directing certain documents to be struck and removed from the applicants' application record;
2) a motion by the applicants for an order to include certain items in the applicants' application record, to retain certain paragraphs in their memorandum of fact and law, and to allow them to file and serve an amended application record and an amended memorandum of fact and law;
3) a supplementary motion by Apotex Inc. for an order for additional relief to that requested in the first motion and an order that further items be struck from the applicants' application record.
[5]
At the outset, it should be noted that applications for prohibition under s. 6(1) of the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
have been held to be applications for judicial review. (
Bayer AG v. Canada (Minister of National Health and Welfare)
(1993), 163 N.R. 183; 51 C.P.R.(3d) 329 (F.C.A.);
Merck Frosst Canada Inc. et al. v. Canada (Minister of National Health and Welfare) et al.
(1994), 169 N.R. 342; 55 C.P.R.(3d) 302 (F.C.A.).) The rules governing applications for judicial review are found in Part V.1 of the
Federal Court Rules
(the 1600 Rules).
[6]
Rule 1602 provides that an application for judicial review must be made by originating notice of motion filed and served within 30 days of the decision or order in respect of which judicial review is sought. Rule 1603 provides that, at the time of filing the notice of motion, the applicant must also file one or more affidavits verifying the facts relied on by the applicant. The respondent's affidavits are to be filed and served no later than 30 days after service of the notice of motion. The respondent's application record must be filed and served within 30 days after service of the applicants' application record. The applicant may file a supplementary application record within 10 days of service of the respondent's application record.
[7]
The Associate Chief Justice has issued a practice direction in respect of the assignment of hearing dates and requests for adjournment. It emphasizes that applications for judicial review must be heard without delay and in a summary way. Further, the applicant should apply for a hearing date within 10 days of service of the respondent's application record. Rule 1614 provides that only a judge may, by order, extend or reduce the time limits prescribed in the 1600 Rules. (The Chief Justice has directed that compliance with the requirements of the 1600 Rules is to be enforced. Application records that are brought to the Registry beyond the times prescribed by the Rules will not be accepted for filing. Parties who are dilatory will be informed at the time of presentation of their documents that an application for extension of time must be made.)
[8]
Interlocutory proceedings are inconsistent with the objectives of an expeditious and summary disposition of an application for judicial review. An application for judicial review should not be treated as an action.
[9]
In
Bull (David) Laboratories (Canada) Inc. v. Pharmacia Inc. et al.
(1994), 176 N.R. 48 (F.C.A.), Mr. Justice Strayer speaking for the court said:
"Unlike the rules pertaining to actions, the 1600 Rules pertaining to judicial review provide a strict timetable for preparation for hearing and a role for the court in ensuring there is no undue delay. Time limits fixed by the rules can only be extended by a judge, not by consent. The court can of its own motion dismiss applications due to delay and can also take the initiative in correcting originating documents. This all reinforces the view that the focus in judicial review is on moving the application along to the hearing stage as quickly as possible. This ensures that objections to the originating notice can be dealt with promptly in the context of consideration of the merits of the case."
[10]
Turning now to the three motions before me, there are two principal categories of documents which the respondent, Apotex Inc., seeks to have struck and removed from the applicants' application record. The first category consists of orders of judges of this court in interlocutory matters in this proceeding, as well as a notice of appeal and a notice of change of solicitors. There are fifteen such orders which are sought to be included in the applicants' application record. All of these orders are presently on the court file. The second category consists of notices of motion and affidavits in support of the motions which were filed by the applicants in support of their request for interlocutory relief. These also form part of the court file.
[11]
The respondent, Apotex Inc., has sought to have this material struck and removed from the applicants' application record, including any reference to such material (except for the orders) in the applicants' memorandum of fact and law. The respondent, Apotex Inc., relies on rule 1606(2) which reads as follows:
"(2) Subject to rule 1609(6), the applicant's application record shall contain the following documents, on consecutively numbered pages and in the following order:
(a) a table of contents giving the nature and date of each document in the record;
(b) a copy of the notice of motion;
(c) a copy of each supporting affidavit, including its documentary exhibits, and a transcript of any cross-examination on the affidavit;
(d) the portions of any transcript of evidence to be used by the applicant at the hearing;
(e) a copy of the decision or order, if any, in respect of which the application is made;
(f) a description of any physical exhibits to be used by the applicant at the hearing; and
(g) a concise memorandum of the points to be argued by the applicant, including a list of the cases intended to be cited." (SOR/92-43, s. 19)
[12]
The applicants seek an order for leave, if necessary, to include fourteen interlocutory orders, a notice of change of solicitor, and a notice of appeal together with four notices of motion and five supporting affidavits. The applicants invoke rule 1619(1) which reads as follows:
"(1) The court may, at any time, by order, waive compliance with all or part of Rules 1606, 1607, 1608 and 1611."
[13]
Apotex Inc. argues that the applicants' application record may only contain the documents enumerated in paras. (a) to (g) of rule 1606(2). Since the material on the court file consisting of orders of this court, a notice of appeal, a notice of change of solicitor, notices of motion and affidavits in support thereof are not enumerated in paras. (a) to (g), the respondent submits that they must be struck and removed from the applicants' application record.
[14]
Rule 1606(2) enumerates what must be included in the applicants' application record (subject to rule 1619(1)). However, rule 1606(2) does not prohibit other documents on the court file from being included in the application record of either party.
[15]
In
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
[16]
Therefore, counsel who are filing an application record should bear in mind that it is not merely a collation of all materials that have been filed with the court and that the application record should serve to define the issues and narrow the focus of the application. Counsel must determine what is necessary for the hearing of the application. However, it is for the judge hearing the application for judicial review to determine the relevance, weight and admissibility of any material filed by the parties.
[17]
The applicants are at liberty to include in their application record interlocutory orders of the court in the proceeding, as well as the notice of change of solicitor and the notice of appeal. They are also at liberty to include the notices of motion on such interlocutory matters. However, the affidavits in support of the interlocutory motions should not be included in the application record. They speak to issues on the interlocutory motions which have been disposed of by an order of the court. This is even more evident when the affidavit supporting an interlocutory motion contains, as an exhibit, an affidavit for which an extension of time to file has not been granted under rule 1614. Rule 1603(1), when read with rule 1614, makes it clear that any affidavit verifying the facts relied on by the applicant must be filed at the time of filing of the originating notice of motion.
[18]
For the above reasons, I would dispose of the motions as follows:
1) the interlocutory orders of judges of this court, the notice of appeal and notice of change of solicitor which are part of the court record in this proceeding, may be included in the applicants' application record;
2) the notices of motion on the court file may also be included in the applicants' application record;
3) the affidavits filed in support of the interlocutory motions should be removed from the applicants' application record;
4) the applicants shall have until November 30, 1994, to file and serve an amended application record and the time for filing and serving the respondents' application record is extended to January 13, 1995.
Application allowed in part.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/blk
[End of document]
