Algueta v. Can. (M.C.I.), [2011] F.T.R. Uned. 834 (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Dolores Estela Viera  Algueta and Maria Guadalupe Rosado Romero (applicants) v. The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration (respondent)
(IMM-350-11; 2011 CF 1028; 2011 FC 1028)
Indexed As: Algueta et al. v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
Cite As: [2011] F.T.R. Uned. 834
Federal Court
Shore, J.
August 31, 2011.
Counsel:
Gisela Barraza, for the applicants;
Angela Gioshi and Margarita Tzavelakos, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Gisela Barraza, Montreal, Quebec, for the applicants;
Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Montreal, Quebec, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. This case was originally cited as [2011] F.T.R. TBEd. SE.007.
I.
Introduction
[1]
Shore, J.
[Translation]: An account loses its truthfulness if, each time it is told, it is not the  same and, in some cases, is not even similar.
II.
Judicial procedure
[2]
This is an application for judicial review of a decision by the Refugee Protection Division (RPD) of the Immigration and Refugee Board dated December 20, 2010, that the applicants, who are both Mexican citizens, are not Convention refugees as defined in section 96 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, S.C. 2001, c. 27 (IRPA), or persons in need of protection according to section 97 of the IRPA, on the ground that they lack credibility.
III.
Facts
[3]
Dolores Estela Viera Algueta, born on September 8, 1957, and Maria Guadalupe Rosado Romero, born on August 21, 1987, are both Mexican citizens. Ms. Rosado Romero bases her refugee claim on that of her aunt, Ms. Viera Algueta, the principal applicant, with whom she lived in the city of Veracruz, Mexico.
[4]
Ms. Viera Algueta is alleging that she was a victim of death threats, extortion and other criminal acts by a man named Luis Noël Dominguez, an entrepreneur from Veracruz, and members of the "Los Zetas" organization.
[5]
Ms. Viera Algueta purportedly belonged to an association of female entrepreneurs called "Compartamos". This non-government association was apparently formed by Mother Teresa of Calcutta. It allegedly exists at a national level and its purpose is to loan money to women to help them start businesses. The principal applicant purportedly received money from this association on two occasions. The money loaned to Ms. Viera Algueta was apparently funded by Mr. Dominguez and by anonymous donors. She testified that she reimbursed the full amount of these two loans, as set out in the written agreements at the time--she did not, however, keep the copies.
[6]
Moreover, in February 2008, when the principal applicant allegedly went with Mr. Dominguez to where a meeting of "Compartamos" members was to be held, Mr. Dominguez was apparently attacked and 1,500,000 pesos were stolen from him (the RPD decision states 1,500 pesos, but this must be the RPD’s error; the applicant clearly stated 1,500,000 pesos in the Applicants’ Memorandum at paragraph 6). This money was purportedly part of the amount that he had loaned to "Compartamos" to give loans to the women in the association.
[7]
The principal applicant allegedly recognized the thieves as people from the neighbourhood who are Los Zetas. However, she purportedly refused to testify against them or to identify them in the legal action that Mr. Dominguez wanted to take against them. From then on, the applicant apparently received threats, both from Mr. Dominguez, who purportedly told her that he would sue her for "fraud and for conspiring with the Los Zetas criminals", which she was accused of in April 2008, and from the Los Zetas, who apparently wanted to prevent her from reporting them to the authorities. The applicant added that members of the Los Zetas allegedly demanded that she pay 350,000 pesos in exchange for which they would leave her, her husband and her niece alone.
[8]
On April 1, 2008, the applicant apparently went to file a complaint with the public prosecutor in Veracruz. In her testimony at the hearing, the applicant initially stated that she went to the public prosecutor to report the threats received from Mr. Dominguez and the Los Zetas. She then changed this testimony to state that she reported only the threats that she had received from the Los Zetas. The applicant also told the panel that, when she returned home after filing that report, some Los Zetas members "were waiting in front of my home, and they threatened to kill me and my niece". In her memorandum, the principal applicant also stated that investigators required an amount of money to proceed with the investigation, money she did not have in her possession.
[9]
The principal applicant allegedly received threats after her visit to the public prosecutor and then decided to leave the country. She allegedly went to hide at her neighbour’s home before leaving her country. She arrived in Canada with her niece on April 4, 2008, and claimed refugee protection at that time.
[10]
Ms. Viera Algueta’s husband was purportedly attacked by members of the Los Zetas on April 20, 2008, after returning to their home in Veracruz. He passed away on January 6, 2009. The applicant also stated at the hearing that, in May 2008, her brothers and her sister moved to Tijuana, near the American border, to hide from the threats they had received from the Los Zetas group because of her. If they were to return to their country, the applicants fear revenge by Mr. Dominguez and by Los Zetas members.
[11]
The principal applicant’s niece confirmed her aunt’s testimony.
IV.
Decision under review
[12]
The RPD found that the principal applicant was "on the whole, not a credible witness" and attached "no credibility to any of her allegations". Consequently, it rejected the applicants’ refugee claim:
[21] The panel does not believe that the principal claimant had any problems whatsoever when she was in Mexico. Therefore, the panel does not believe that she received threats from Mr. Dominguez or from Los Zetas members, as she claims.
. . .
[92] As the panel noted above, the claimant gave the immigration officer a different response from the one that she gave the panel regarding the origin of her fear of returning to Mexico.
[93] However, it does not stop there. The claimant’s statements also differ regarding the circumstances of the threats that she allegedly received. She gave different versions of these circumstances concerning the chronology and the nature of these threats when she was talking to the officer and when she was filling out her PIF.
V.
Issue
[13]
Are the applicants raising a serious ground on which the Court can rely to intervene in accordance with subsection 18.1(4) of the
Federal Courts Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7?
VI.
Relevant statutory provisions
[14]
The following provisions of the IRPA apply to this case:
Convention refugee
96.
A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(
a
) is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or
(
b
) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country.
Person in need of protection
97.
(1) A person in need of protection is a person in Canada whose removal to their country or countries of nationality or, if they do not have a country of nationality, their country of former habitual residence, would subject them personally
(
a
) to a danger, believed on substantial grounds to exist, of torture within the meaning of Article 1 of the Convention Against Torture; or
(
b
) to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if
(i) the person is unable or, because of that risk, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of that country,
(ii) the risk would be faced by the person in every part of that country and is not faced generally by other individuals in or from that country,
(iii) the risk is not inherent or incidental to lawful sanctions, unless imposed in disregard of accepted international standards, and
(iv) the risk is not caused by the inability of that country to provide adequate health or medical care.
Person in need of protection
(2) A person in Canada who is a member of a class of persons prescribed by the regulations as being in need of protection is also a person in need of protection.
Définition de « réfugié »
96.
A qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention -- le réfugié -- la personne qui, craignant avec raison d’être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques:
a
) soit se trouve hors de tout pays dont elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de chacun de ces pays;
b) soit, si elle n’a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ni, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner.
Personne à protéger
97.
(1) A qualité de personne à protéger la personne qui se trouve au Canada et serait personnellement, par son renvoi vers tout pays dont elle a la nationalité ou, si elle n’a pas de nationalité, dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, exposée:
a
) soit au risque, s’il y a des motifs sérieux de le croire, d’être soumise à la torture au sens de l’article premier de la Convention contre la torture;
b) soit à une menace à sa vie ou au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités dans le cas suivant:
(i) elle ne peut ou, de ce fait, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de ce pays,
(ii) elle y est exposée en tout lieu de ce pays alors que d’autres personnes originaires de ce pays ou qui s’y trouvent ne le sont généralement pas,
(iii) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de sanctions légitimes -- sauf celles infligées au mépris des normes internationales -- et inhérents à celles-ci ou occasionnés par elles,
(iv) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de l’incapacité du pays de fournir des soins médicaux ou de santé adéquats.
Personne à protéger
(2) A également qualité de personne à protéger la personne qui se trouve au Canada et fait partie d’une catégorie de personnes auxquelles est reconnu par règlement le besoin de protection.
VII.
Positions of the parties
[15]
In support of their application for judicial review, the applicants cited
Maldonado v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration)
, [1980] 2 F.C. 302 (CA), to the effect that there is a presumption that an applicant’s sworn statement is true unless there is a valid reason to doubt it. The principal applicant submits that she properly explained her account and even provided evidence of what she said, namely, the exhibit that demonstrates that she had actually been accused of fraud and the report by the public prosecutor’s investigator dated April 1, 2008 (Tribunal Record at pages 169 to 174). The panel therefore purportedly erred by failing to consider all of the testimonial evidence and erred in law by systematically finding that the principal applicant’s testimony was implausible without referring to evidence to support its assessment of the facts. The principal applicant also submitted the argument that she was not given the opportunity to properly express herself and explain her account at the point of entry in Canada, which would explain the discrepancies between her Personal Information Form (PIF) and the point of entry notes.
[16]
The respondent claims that the panel’s decision is well founded in fact and in law, that it is reasonable and that it contains no error that would warrant the intervention of the Court. According to the respondent, the RPD properly explained the numerous contradictions, omissions, discrepancies, inconsistencies and implausibilities in the testimonial and documentary evidence, namely, with respect to the identity of the persecutors and the facts on which the fear was based.
VIII.
Standard of review
[17]
It is well established in the case law that the standard of review applicable to credibility findings made by the panel is reasonableness (
Dunsmuir v. New Brunswick
, 2008 SCC 9, [2008] 1 S.C.R. 190 at paragraph 47;
Martin v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, 2010 FC 664, at paragraph 11).
[18]
This Court has recognized on many occasions that curial deference should be shown to the panel’s findings because of the panel’s expertise in such matters (
Aguebor v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration)
(1993), 160 N.R. 315;
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED).
IX.
Analysis
[19]
The RPD found that the principal applicant’s allegations were not credible. To come to this conclusion, the panel found numerous contradictions, omissions, discrepancies, inconsistencies and implausibilities in the testimonial and documentary evidence. The RPD noted, namely, that upon the applicants’ arrival in Canada, the principal applicant gave the immigration officer statements that were different from those she gave in her PIF and during her testimony at the hearing regarding the identity of her persecutors and the facts on which her refugee claim is based (Decision at paragraph 27):
a. Upon her arrival in Canada, the principal applicant told the immigration officer that she fears "the authorities" and "the public ministry" (Decision at paragraphs 25, 42 and 84). However, in her initial PIF, the principal applicant in no way stated that she fears the Mexican authorities or the public prosecutor, and indicated instead that she fears "Luis Noel Dominguez" and "‘some people’ / some ‘thieves’ who had allegedly attacked Mr. Dominguez" (Decision at paragraphs 36 and 52);
b. During her testimony at the hearing, the principal applicant stated, regarding her persecutors, that they were in fact [translation] "members of Los Zetas". She also stated that she fears Mr. Dominguez because she refused to testify for him. The applicant failed to mention her fear of the Mexican authorities and/or the public prosecutor (Decision at paragraphs 30 and 44).
c. After a thorough assessment of the notes taken by the immigration officer at the point of entry, the panel stated that these notes are lengthy and detailed (Decision at paragraph 96). The panel therefore did not believe that the omissions and discrepancies arose from a lack of thoroughness on the part of the immigration officer, as the applicants claim.
[20]
With respect to the discrepancies that exist between the immigration officer’s notes at the point of entry, the applicant’s testimony and the information in the PIF, the Court found that these discrepancies may be determinative in the credibility assessment:
[23] According to case law, inconsistencies between an applicant's statements at the port of entry and testimony about crucial elements of a claim are sufficient to taint his credibility:
Nsombo v. Canada (M.C.I.)
, IMM-5147-03;
Shahota v. Canada (M.C.I.)
, [2004] F.C.J. No. 1540, online: QL;
Neame v. Canada (M.C.I.)
, [2000] F.C.J. No. 378, online: QL.
(
Chen v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, 2005 FC 767, 148 A.C.W.S. (3d) 118;
Cienfuegos v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, 2009 FC 1262.)
[21]
The panel also noted several other discrepancies and implausibilities in the central points of the principal applicant’s account, including:
a. the principal applicant failed to tell the immigration officer, or indicate in her PIF, that she belonged to the "Compartamos" association, while at the hearing she stated that her problems started because the money was stolen (Decision at paragraph 39). The panel did not accept the applicant’s explanation that she had failed to mention that she belonged to this association because it was not an organization that committed crimes (Decision at paragraph 31);
b. The panel emphasized that the principal applicant had indicated that she was a victim of extortion only a few days before her hearing by making an addition to her PIF, and failed to mention it in her initial PIF or in her amended PIF despite the fact that she had mentioned it to the immigration officer upon her arrival in Canada (Decision at paragraphs 88-89, 100);
c. Moreover, the principal applicant allegedly stated several times during her testimony that she has no outstanding loans, which makes the version of the facts given to the immigration officer, that is, that she was accused of failing to reimburse a loan, implausible (Decision at paragraphs 44 and 63-64);
d. With respect to the exhibits submitted by the applicants, the RPD gave little weight to this evidence, namely, regarding the fact that there was no follow-up to the principal applicant’s failure to reply to the notice to appear (Decision at paragraphs 50 to 52 and 78 to 83).
[22]
It is settled law that the Court may intervene only if the RPD’s decision is found to be unreasonable because of the high level of deference owed to findings of fact made by a specialized tribunal. The assessment of an applicant’s credibility is a question of fact to which the Court must give deference (
Blanquez v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, 2011 FC 566;
Serrato v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, 2009 FC 176, at paragraphs 15-16). In this case, the RPD gave a detailed explanation of why it did not find the applicants credible. The Court can therefore not allow the application for judicial review.
X.
Conclusion
[23]
Given the foregoing, the Court finds that the documents submitted by the applicants do not raise any serious grounds that would permit the Court to allow their application for judicial review. Consequently, the Court dismisses the application.
JUDGMENT
[24]
THE COURT DISMISSES
the applicants’ application for judicial review. No question for certification arises.
.........................
Dolores Estela Viera Algueta and Maria Guadalupe Rosado Romero (demanderesses) v. Le ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l'Immigration (défenderesse)
I. Introduction
[1]
Le juge Shore
: Un récit perd sa véracité si à chaque reprise du récit, le récit ne demeure plus pareil et, dans certains cas, même pas semblable.
II. Procédure judiciaire
[2]
Il s'agit d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire à l'encontre d'une décision de la Section de la protection des réfugiés (SPR) de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié, rendue le 20 décembre 2010, selon laquelle les demanderesses, toutes deux citoyennes mexicaines, n'ont pas la qualité de réfugiées au sens de la Convention tel que défini à l'article 96 de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, ch. 27 [
LIPR
], ni la qualité de personnes à protéger selon l'article 97 de la
LIPR
, et ce, en raison de leur manque de crédibilité.
III. Faits
[3]
Madame Dolores Estela Viera Algueta, née le 8 septembre 1957, et madame Maria Guadalupe Rosado Romero, née le 21 août 1987, sont toutes deux citoyennes du Mexique. Madame Rosado Romero fonde sa demande d'asile sur celle de sa tante, madame Viera Algueta, la demanderesse principale, avec qui elle habitait dans la ville de Veracruz, au Mexique.
[4]
Madame Viera Algueta allègue avoir fait l'objet de menaces de mort, d'extorsion et d'autres délits criminels, de la part d'un individu, nommé monsieur Luis Noël Dominguez, un entrepreneur de Veracruz, et de la part de membres de l'organisation « Los Zetas ».
[5]
Madame Viera Algueta aurait fait partie d'une association de femmes entrepreneures du nom de « Compartamos ». Cette association non gouvernementale aurait été formée par mère Teresa de Calcutta. Elle existerait au niveau national et aurait pour but de prêter de l'argent aux femmes, afin de les aider à partir en affaires. La demanderesse principale aurait reçu à deux reprises de l'argent de cette association. L'argent prêté à madame Viera Algueta aurait été financé par monsieur Dominguez et par des donateurs anonymes. Elle a témoigné avoir remboursé, tel que convenu par les ententes écrites rédigées à l'époque, dont elle n'a toutefois pas gardé de copies, la totalité de ces deux emprunts.
[6]
Par ailleurs, en février 2008, alors que la demanderesse principale aurait accompagné monsieur Dominguez pour se rendre au lieu où devait se tenir une réunion des membres de « Compartamos », ce dernier aurait fait l'objet d'une agression lors de laquelle on lui aurait volé la somme de 1,500,000 pesos (la décision de la SPR mentionne que ce serait 1500 pesos ... mais cela doit être une erreur de la part de la SPR: la demanderesse mentionne bien 1, 500, 000 pesos - para 6 du mémoire des demanderesses). Cet argent aurait fait partie du montant qu'il avait prêté à « Compartamos » pour financer des prêts aux femmes de l'association.
[7]
La demanderesse principale aurait reconnu les voleurs comme étant des gens du quartier qui sont des Los Zetas. Elle aurait toutefois refusé d'aller témoigner contre eux ou de les identifier dans le cadre de poursuites que monsieur Dominguez souhaitait entamer à leur encontre. Dès lors, la demanderesse aurait fait l'objet de menaces: d'une part, de monsieur Dominguez qui lui aurait dit qu'il la poursuivrait pour « fraude et complicité avec les malfaiteurs du Los Zetas », ce dont elle fut accusée en avril 2008, et d'autre part, de ces derniers qui auraient voulu l'empêcher de les dénoncer aux autorités. La demanderesse a ajouté que les membres du Los Zetas lui auraient demandé de verser la somme de 350 000 pesos, en échange de quoi, ils la laisseraient tranquille, elle, son mari et sa nièce.
[8]
Le 1er avril 2008, la demanderesse serait allée déposer une plainte au ministère public de Veracruz. Dans son témoignage en audience, la demanderesse a commencé par dire qu'elle serait allée dénoncer au ministère public les menaces reçues de monsieur Dominguez et des gens du Los Zetas. Elle a par la suite modifié ce témoignage pour dire qu'elle aurait seulement rapporté les menaces qu'elle aurait reçues de Los Zetas. La demanderesse dira aussi au tribunal qu'à son retour chez elle après avoir fait cette dénonciation, des membres de Los Zetas « m'attendaient devant chez moi et ils ont menacé de me tuer moi et ma nièce. » Dans son mémoire, la demanderesse principale affirme également que les enquêteurs auraient exigé une somme d'argent pour procéder à l'enquête, somme qu'elle n'avait pas en sa possession.
[9]
La demanderesse principale aurait reçu des menaces suite à sa visite au ministère public et elle aurait alors décidé de quitter le pays. Elle serait allée se cacher chez sa voisine avant de quitter son pays. Elle est arrivée au Canada accompagnée de sa nièce le 4 avril 2008 et a demandé l'asile à ce moment.
[10]
Le conjoint de madame Viera Algueta aurait été agressé par des membres du Los Zetas en date du 20 avril 2008 après être retourné à leur domicile à Veracruz. Il est décédé en date du 6 janvier 2009. La demanderesse a aussi mentionné en audience qu'au mois de mai 2008, ses frères et sa sœur auraient déménagé à Tijuana, à proximité de la frontière américaine, afin de se mettre à l'abri des menaces qu'ils auraient reçues à cause d'elle de la part du groupe Los Zetas. Advenant un retour dans leur pays, les demanderesses craignent la vengeance de monsieur Dominguez et de membres du Los Zetas.
[11]
La nièce de la demanderesse principale a confirmé le témoignage de sa tante.
IV. Décision faisant l'objet du présent contrôle judiciaire
[12]
La SPR a conclu que la demanderesse principale était un témoin « globalement non crédible » et n'a accordé « aucune crédibilité à toutes ses allégations ». Par conséquent, il a rejeté la demande d'asile des demanderesses:
[21] Le tribunal ne croit pas que la demandeure principale ait connu quelque problème que ce soit alors qu'elle était au Mexique. Il ne croit pas qu'elle ait reçu des menaces de la part de M. Dominguez ou de membres de Los Zetas, comme elle le prétend.
. . . . .
[92] Comme le tribunal l'a constaté plus haut dans sa décision, la demandeure a, concernant l'origine de sa crainte de retourner au Mexique, donné à l'agent d'immigration une réponse différente de celle qu'elle a invoquée devant le tribunal.
[93] Mais cela ne s'arrête pas là. Les déclarations de la demandeure divergent aussi quant aux faits entourant les circonstances des menaces qu'elle aurait reçues. Elle a en effet donné des versions différentes de ces faits au niveau de la chronologie et de la nature de ces menaces selon qu'elle parle à l'agent ou qu'elle remplit son FRP.
V. Point en litige
[13]
Les demanderesses soulèvent-elles un motif sérieux sur lequel la Cour pourrait se fonder pour intervenir en vertu du paragraphe 18.1(4) de la
Loi sur les Cours fédérales
, LRC, 1985, ch. F-7?
VI. Dispositions législatives pertinentes
[14]
Les dispositions suivantes de la
LIPR
s'appliquent au présent cas:
Définition de « réfugié »
96. A qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention - le réfugié - la personne qui, craignant avec raison d'être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques:
a) soit se trouve hors de tout pays dont elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de chacun de ces pays;
b) soit, si elle n'a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ni, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner.
Personne à protéger
97.(1) A qualité de personne à protéger la personne qui se trouve au Canada et serait personnellement, par son renvoi vers tout pays dont elle a la nationalité ou, si elle n'a pas de nationalité, dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, exposée:
a) soit au risque, s'il y a des motifs sérieux de le croire, d'être soumise à la torture au sens de l'article premier de la Convention contre la torture;
b) soit à une menace à sa vie ou au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités dans le cas suivant:
(i) elle ne peut ou, de ce fait, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de ce pays,
(ii) elle y est exposée en tout lieu de ce pays alors que d'autres personnes originaires de ce pays ou qui s'y trouvent ne le sont généralement pas,
(iii) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de sanctions légitimes - sauf celles infligées au mépris des normes internationales - et inhérents à celles-ci ou occasionnés par elles,
(iv) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de l'incapacité du pays de fournir des soins médicaux ou de santé adéquats.
Personne à protéger
(2) A également qualité de personne à protéger la personne qui se trouve au Canada et fait partie d'une catégorie de personnes auxquelles est reconnu par règlement le besoin de protection.
Convention refugee
96. A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(a) is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or
(b) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country.
Person in need of protection
97. (1) A person in need of protection is a person in Canada whose removal to their country or countries of nationality or, if they do not have a country of nationality, their country of former habitual residence, would subject them personally
(a) to a danger, believed on substantial grounds to exist, of torture within the meaning of Article 1 of the Convention Against Torture; or
(b) to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if
(i) the person is unable or, because of that risk, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of that country,
(ii) the risk would be faced by the person in every part of that country and is not faced generally by other individuals in or from that country,
(iii) the risk is not inherent or incidental to lawful sanctions, unless imposed in disregard of accepted international standards, and
(iv) the risk is not caused by the inability of that country to provide adequate health or medical care.
Person in need of protection
(2) A person in Canada who is a member of a class of persons prescribed by the regulations as being in need of protection is also a person in need of protection.
VII. Position des parties
[15]
Au soutien de leur demande de contrôle judiciaire, les demanderesses ont cité la décision
Maldonado v. Canada (Ministre de l'Emploi et de l'Immigration)
, [1980] 2 CF 302 (CA), à l'effet qu'il existe une présomption voulant que les faits que jure un demandeur sont véridiques, à moins qu'il y ait des raisons valables de douter de leur véracité. La demanderesse principale soumet qu'elle a bien expliqué son récit et qu'elle a même apporté des preuves de ce qu'elle avançait, notamment la pièce qui démontrait qu'elle avait réellement été accusée de fraude et le rapport de l'enquêteur du ministère public du 1er avril 2008 (Dossier du tribunal aux pp 169 à 174). Le tribunal aurait donc erré en omettant de considérer l'ensemble de la preuve testimoniale et aurait également erré en droit en concluant systématiquement à l'invraisemblance du témoignage de demanderesse principale, sans faire état d'éléments de preuve pour appuyer son évaluation des faits. La demanderesse principale a également soumis l'argument qu'elle n'a pas eu la chance de bien s'exprimer et d'expliquer son histoire au point d'entrée au Canada, ce qui expliquerait les divergences entre son Formulaire de renseignements personnels [FRP] et les notes au point d'entrée.
[16]
Le défendeur soumet que la décision du tribunal est bien fondée en fait et en droit, est raisonnable et ne contient aucune erreur qui justifierait l'intervention de la Cour. Selon le défendeur, la SPR a bien expliqué les nombreuses contradictions, omissions, divergences, incohérences et invraisemblances dans la preuve testimoniale et documentaire, notamment quant à l'identité des persécuteurs et des faits à l'origine de la crainte.
VIII. Norme de contrôle
[17]
Il est bien établi par la jurisprudence que la norme de contrôle applicable à des conclusions du tribunal en matière de crédibilité est celle de la décision raisonnable (
Dunsmuir v. Nouveau-Brunswick
, 2008 CSC 9, [2008] 1 RCS 190 au para 47;
Martin v. Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l'Immigration)
, 2010 CF 664, au para 11)
[18]
Cette Cour a reconnu à maintes reprises devoir faire preuve de déférence judiciaire face aux conclusions du tribunal, celui-ci bénéficiant d'une expertise en pareille matière (
Aguebor v. Canada (Ministre de l'Emploi et de l'Immigration)
(1993), 160 NR 315;
Olguin v. Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l'Immigration)
, 2009 CF 193, au para 4).
IX. Analyse
[19]
La SPR a conclu que les allégations de la demanderesse principale n'étaient pas crédibles. Pour en arriver à cette conclusion, le tribunal a relevé de nombreuses contradictions, omissions, divergences, incohérences et invraisemblances dans la preuve testimoniale et documentaire. La SPR a notamment noté qu'à l'arrivée des demanderesses au Canada, la demanderesse principale a donné à l'agent d'immigration des déclarations différentes de celles qu'elle a rapportées dans son FRP et lors de son témoignage à l'audience relativement à l'identité de ses persécuteurs, ainsi qu'aux faits à l'origine de sa demande d'asile (Décision au para 27):
a. À son arrivée au Canada, la demanderesse principale a mentionné à l'agent d'immigration craindre « les autorités » et « le ministère public » (Décision aux para 25, 42 et 84). Or, dans son FRP initial, la demanderesse principale n'avait mentionné nulle part craindre les autorités mexicaines ou le ministère public, mais indiquait plutôt craindre « Luis Noël Dominguez » et « des personnes » / des « voleurs » qui auraient agressé M. Dominguez » (Décision aux para 36 et 52);
b. Lors de son témoignage à l'audience, la demanderesse principale a déclaré relativement à ses persécuteurs qu'ils seraient en réalité « des membres de Los Zetas ». Elle a déclaré également craindre monsieur Dominguez, parce qu'elle aurait refusé de témoigner en sa faveur. La demanderesse n'a fait aucune mention de sa crainte à l'égard des autorités mexicaines et/ou du ministère public (Décision au para 30 et 44).
c. Après un examen attentif des notes de l'agent d'immigration au point d'entrée, le tribunal a constaté que ces notes sont longues et bien détaillées (Décision au para 96). Le tribunal ne croyait donc pas que les omissions et divergences provenaient d'un manque de rigueur de la part de l'agent d'immigration, comme le soutiennent les demanderesses.
[20]
Au sujet de divergences existant entre les notes de l'agent d'immigration au point d'entrée, le témoignage du demandeur et les renseignements contenus au FRP, la Cour a déterminé que ces divergences peuvent être déterminantes dans l'évaluation de la crédibilité:
[23] La jurisprudence indique que des divergences entre la déclaration au point d'entrée et le témoignage d'un demandeur sont suffisantes pour justifier une conclusion de non-crédibilité lorsqu'elles portent sur des éléments centraux d'une demande:
Nsombo v. Canada (M.C.I
.), IMM-5147-03;
Shahota v. Canada (M.C.I
.), [2004] A.C.F. no 1540;
Neame v. Canada (M.C.I.)
, [2000] A.C.F. no 378.
(
Chen v. Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l'Immigration)
, 2005 CF 767, 148 ACWS (3d) 118;
Cienfuegos v. Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l'Immigration)
, 2009 CF 1262).
[21]
Le tribunal a par ailleurs noté plusieurs autres divergences et invraisemblances dans les éléments centraux du récit de la demanderesse principale, entre autres:
a. la demanderesse principale a omis d'indiquer à l'agent d'immigration, ainsi que dans son FRP qu'elle faisait partie de l'association « Compartamos », alors qu'à l'audience elle a déclaré que c'était à cause du vol de l'argent que ses problèmes auraient commencé (Décision au para 39). Le tribunal a rejeté l'explication de la demanderesse à l'effet qu'elle n'avait pas déclaré faire partie de cette organisation parce qu'il ne s'agissait pas d'une organisation qui commettait des crimes (Décision au para 31);
b. Le tribunal a souligné que la demanderesse principale avait indiqué avoir fait l'objet d'extorsion, seulement quelques jours avant son audience par un ajout à son FRP, ne mentionnant pas ce fait dans son FRP initial, ni dans son FRP amendé, malgré qu'elle l'avait mentionné à l'agent d'immigration lors de son arrivée au Canada (Décision aux para 88-89, 100);
c. Par ailleurs, la demanderesse principale aurait affirmé à plusieurs reprises lors de son témoignage, n'avoir aucun prêt en souffrance, ce qui rendait invraisemblable la version de faits offerte à l'agent d'immigration, soit d'avoir été accusée de ne pas avoir remboursé un prêt (Décision aux para 44 et 63-64);
d. Quant aux pièces déposées par les demanderesses, la SPR n'a accordé que peu de force probante à cette preuve, notamment quant au fait qu'il n'y aurait jamais eu de suite au défaut de la demanderesse principale de répondre à l'avis de convocation (Décision aux para 50 à 52 et 78 à 83).
[22]
Il est de jurisprudence constante que la Cour ne peut agir que lorsque la décision de la SPR est jugée déraisonnable, en raison du degré de déférence élevé dû aux conclusions de fait tirées par un tribunal spécialisé. L'appréciation de la crédibilité d'un demandeur est une question de faits à laquelle la Cour doit accorder déférence (
Blanquez v. Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l'Immigration)
, 2011 CF 566;
Serrato v. Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l'Immigration)
, 2009 CF 176, aux para 15-16). En l'espèce, la SPR a expliqué en détail les motifs pour lesquels elle ne jugeait pas les demanderesses crédibles. La Cour ne peut donc pas accepter la demande de contrôle judiciaire.
X. Conclusion
[23]
Compte tenu de ce qui précède, la Cour détermine que les documents déposés par les demanderesses ne font valoir aucun motif sérieux susceptible de permettre à la Cour d'accueillir leur demande de contrôle judiciaire. Par conséquent, la Cour rejette la demande.
JUGEMENT
[24]
LA COUR REJETTE
la demande de contrôle judiciaire de la partie demanderesse. Aucune question à certifier.
[End of document]
