[34]
In
Richardson
a removal order was issued against Mr. Richardson for reasons of criminality. At the outset he had decided not to appeal the decision to issue the removal order. After the expiration of the delay to appeal, he changed his mind and filed a motion pursuant to Rule 9(2) of the
Immigration Appeal Board Rules
of 1981, to extend the time limitation imposed by Rule 22 of the same
Rules
. These provisions are similar to Rules 58(d) and 7(2) of the current
IAD Rules
and the former
Rules
essentially provided the Appeal Division with the authority to extend time generally. In its reasons the Federal Court of Appeal concluded that the Appeal Division had jurisdiction to extend the delay for filing a notice of appeal. At page 48, the Court reasoned as follows:
"With every defence, we are all of the view that subsection 9(2) of these same
Rules
does empower the board to grant such an enlargement.
"That subsection provides 'In the case of an appeal brought pursuant to subsection 72(1) of the
Act
, the Board may enlarge the time prescribed by these
Rules
for doing any act or taking any proceeding on such terms, if any, as seem just, although the application for the enlargement is not made until after the expiration of the prescribed or fixed time.'
"Subsection 72(1) confers upon this applicant, as a permanent resident, the right of appeal to the Board from a removal order made against him, on a question of law, or fact, or mixed law and fact as well as upon equitable grounds.
"In our view, an application for extension of the five day period specified in Rule 22 is clearly within the contemplation of the language employed in Rule 9(2). We do not agree with the view of the Trial Division in
Kwan
that Rule 9(2) 'only authorizes the Board to enlarge the time when an appeal has been brought, in other words, when an appeal is already before it.' In our opinion, such an interpretation reflects an unduly restricted construction of the words used in Rule 9(2), actually it is hardly possible to visualize a factual scenario where Rule 9(2) could be utilized, given such a narrow interpretation. We think that, when someone in the position of this applicant who has been given a right to appeal the exclusion order issued against him, applies to extend the time within which to file that appeal, he is 'bringing a proceeding' as that expression is used in Rule 9(2)."