Date: 20160204
Docket: IMM-564-15
Citation:
2016 FC 132
Ottawa, Ontario, February 4, 2016
PRESENT:    The
Honourable Mr. Justice Boswell
BETWEEN:
IMAD ZMARI
Applicant
and
THE MINISTER OF
CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION
Respondent
JUDGMENT AND REASONS
[1]
The Applicant is a 42 year old Palestinian who
has applied for judicial review of a decision dated December 5, 2014, rejecting
his application for a restricted pre-removal risk assessment.
I.
Background
[2]
The Applicant joined the Palestinian Liberation
Organization in 1989 when he was 16 years old. In 1993 and 1994 he was
arrested and beaten by Israeli authorities on suspicion of being a member of an
illegal organization and throwing stones. In March 1995, he joined the
Palestinian Authority as an officer in the General Intelligence Directorate
[GID], a secret police agency known in Arab countries as the Mukhabarat.
Despite being an officer of the GID, the Applicant was arrested and jailed by
the GID on various occasions and for various reasons, the last of which was following
his third request to resign from the GID when he was jailed for about a week.
After he was granted leave to visit friends and family in Jordan in March 2000,
the Applicant fled from there to the United States, utilizing a temporary visa
previously issued to him in 1998 when he had been sent to the US to receive
training from the Central Intelligence Agency on the protection of VIPs. In
early 2001, the Applicant learned that the GID had sent police officers to his
home in Palestine in October and November 2000 to arrest him, and also that his
father had been detained at the police station and questioned as to his
whereabouts for two hours.
[3]
According to the Applicant, living without
status in the US made him feel anxious and nervous, so he came to Canada on
March 23, 2003, making a claim for refugee protection the same day. Two days
later, his claim was referred to the Refugee Protection Division [RPD] of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Board [the Board], and on April 29, 2003,
the RPD received his Personal Information Form. In November 2005, after the
Canada Border Services Agency [CBSA] had completed two reports as to the
Applicant’s inadmissibility, the CBSA requested the RPD to suspend his claim
until the Immigration Division [ID] of the Board could determine if he was
inadmissible. In October 2008, the ID found the Applicant inadmissible for two
reasons: one, under paragraph 34(1)(f) of the Immigration and Refugee
Protection Act, SC 2001, c 27 [Act], because he had been a member of
the Palestinian Authority, an organization that had recently engaged in
terrorist acts (although it had not done so while the Applicant had been a GID
officer); and two, under paragraph 35(1)(a) of the Act, by reason of
crimes against humanity which the Mukhabarat regularly committed while
he was a GID officer. Leave for judicial review of the ID’s decision was denied
by this Court in October 2009.
[4]
In February 2009, the Applicant applied for a
restricted pre-removal risk assessment [PRRA] as well as permanent residence by
way of a spousal sponsorship with his wife who is a Canadian citizen and the
mother of the Applicant’s two young, Canadian-born children. In March 2009, a
PRRA officer found that, if deported to Palestine, the Applicant would be at
risk under section 97 of the Act. In January 2011 the Applicant’s
permanent residence application was refused due to his inadmissibility. Nearly
five years after the PRRA officer’s positive risk assessment, CBSA completed
its danger assessment on March 10, 2014, concluding that the Applicant was not
a danger to Canada. The PRRA officer’s risk assessment, CBSA’s danger
assessment, additional documentation, and the Applicant’s submissions were all
then sent to a Director, Case Determination [the Director], at Citizenship and
Immigration Canada. In a letter dated December 5, 2014, the Director refused
the Applicant’s restricted PRRA application despite CBSA deeming him not to be
a danger to Canadian society and the PRRA officer finding him to be at risk if
returned to Palestine.
II.
The Director’s Decision
[5]
The Director found that the Applicant would not
be at risk of torture, risk to life or risk of cruel and unusual treatment or
punishment if he was removed to Palestine. The Director reviewed the facts
pertaining to the Applicant and considered the situation in the West Bank,
including the political situation and the recorded human rights abuses by the
Palestinian Authority and its police forces.
[6]
The Director found “Mr.
Zmari’s actions are not consistent with an individual who faces a risk to life,
a risk of torture or a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment.”
The Director noted that the Applicant willingly joined the Palestinian
Authority, received promotions, and was selected for specialized training in
the US. The Director also found that although the Applicant travelled outside
the West Bank, he had not attempted to stay in Jordan. In addition, the
Director stated that the Applicant had not made a claim for asylum at the
earliest possible opportunity, remaining in the US for three years before
seeking asylum in Canada.
[7]
The Director acknowledged the Applicant’s
expressed fears of the Palestinian Authority, Hamas, and Israel. However, with
respect to Hamas and Israel, the Director found insufficient evidence to
support the Applicant’s fears in this regard. As to the Palestinian Authority,
the Director acknowledged that the PRRA officer had accepted the Applicant’s
allegation, supported by his brother’s letter, that the GID had ordered his
return and threatened to arrest him. The Director, though, stated that this
letter was “self-serving” and consequently gave
it “little weight.” The Director also found the
Applicant’s concern about his passport, which had been sent to his brother for
renewal and possibly taken by the Palestinian Authority, “speculative” and, consequently, gave the disappearance
of the passport “very little weight.” Although
the documentary evidence before the Director clearly showed that Palestinians
suspected of collaboration with Israel face serious reprisals, including
torture and execution, the Applicant’s absence from the West Bank since March
2000 meant he had had little opportunity to provide any tangible intelligence
to the Israelis since that time, making it speculative and unlikely that he
might be seen as an Israeli collaborator.
[8]
The Director made the following conclusion on
the Applicant’s risk:
My review of the information on file does
not lead me to conclude that Mr. Zmari has a subjective fear of returning to
the West Bank, nor has he demonstrated an objectively-identifiable risk. … He
states that he was imprisoned on a number of occasions, however his career with
the General Intelligence division of the Palestinian Authority suggests that he
was an employee who was trusted enough to be sent on specialized training to
the United States, trusted enough to be assigned to guard Bill Clinton when he
travelled to Jericho, and who was promoted to the rank of Sergeant Major within
five years of his service. Mr. Zmari was permitted to travel into Jordan on at
least three occasions that he has recounted, and although he recounts one
occasion when he was turned back at the border, this appears to be as a result
of his lack of proper documents and not persecutory treatment. Finally,
although Mr. Zmari provides objective supporting evidence of his imprisonment
in 1994, he provides insufficient supporting evidence of imprisonment by the
Palestinian Authority between 1995 and 2000.
Consequently, for all of the afore stated
reasons, I am satisfied on a balance of probabilities that Mr. Zmari is not
likely to face personalized risks as identified in section 97 of IRPA – namely
that he is unlikely to be tortured, face cruel or unusual treatment or be
killed if returned to the West Bank.
III.
Issues
[9]
The three issues raised by the Applicant may be
rephrased as follows:
1.
What is the appropriate standard of review?
2.
Did the Director err and deny procedural
fairness by failing to have an oral hearing before making adverse and
determinative credibility findings?
3.
Did the Director err by unreasonably
disregarding the evidence from the Applicant's brother?
IV.
Analysis
A.
What is the appropriate standard of review?
[10]
The appropriate standard of review applicable to
whether an oral hearing is required in a PRRA determination is open to some question.
The Court's recent decisions in this regard diverge and follow one of two
paths.
[11]
One path finds the applicable scope of review to
be a standard of correctness with no deference accorded to the decision-maker, because
the issue of whether an oral hearing is required is a question of procedural
fairness. See, e.g.: Suntharalingam v Canada (Citizenship and Immigration),
2015 FC 1025 at para 48, 257 ACWS (3d) 924; Antoine v Canada (Citizenship
and Immigration), 2015 FC 795 at para 12, 258 ACWS (3d) 153; Matinguo-Testie
v Canada (Citizenship and Immigration), 2015 FC 651 at para 6, 254 ACWS
(3d) 149; Vargas Hernandez v Canada (Citizenship and Immigration), 2015
FC 578 at para 17, 254 ACWS (3d) 912; Negm v Canada (Citizenship and
Immigration), 2015 FC 272 at para 33, 250 ACWS (3d) 317; Micolta v Canada
(Citizenship and Immigration), 2015 FC 183 at para 13, 249 ACWS (3d) 826; Fawaz
v Canada (Citizenship and Immigration), 2012 FC 1394 at para 56, 422
FTR 95; and Ahmad v Canada (Citizenship and Immigration), 2012 FC 89 at
para 18, 211 ACWS (3d) 409.
[12]
The other path applies a deferential standard of
reasonableness because the application of paragraph 113(b) of the Act
and section 167 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations,
SOR/2002-227 [Regulations] is a question of mixed law and fact. See,
e.g.: Thiruchelvam v Canada (Citizenship and Immigration), 2015 FC 913
at para 3, 256 ACWS (3d) 394; Kulanayagam v Canada (Citizenship and
Immigration), 2015 FC 101 at para 20, 248 ACWS (3d) 921; Abusaninah v Canada
(Citizenship and Immigration), 2015 FC 234 at para 21 249 ACWS (3d) 843; Ibrahim
v Canada (Citizenship and Immigration), 2014 FC 837 at para 6, 244 ACWS
(3d) 177; Kanto v Canada (Citizenship and Immigration), 2014 FC 628 at
paras 11-12, 242 ACWS (3d) 912; Bicuku v Canada (Citizenship and
Immigration), 2014 FC 339 at paras 16-17, 239 ACWS (3d) 723; Chekroun v Canada
(Citizenship and Immigration), 2013 FC 737 at para 40, 436 FTR 1; Ponniah
v Canada (Citizenship and Immigration), 2013 FC 386 at para 24, 229 ACWS
(3d) 1140; and Adetunji v Canada (Citizenship and Immigration), 2012 FC
708 at para 27, 218 ACWS (3d) 616.
[13]
In my view, whether an oral hearing is required
in a PRRA determination raises a question of procedural fairness. As noted by
the Supreme Court in Mission Institution v Khela, 2014 SCC 24 at para 79,
[2014] 1 SCR 502, “the standard for determining whether
the decision maker complied with the duty of procedural fairness will continue
to be ‘correctness’.” Accordingly, the Director's determination in this
case not to convoke a hearing should be reviewed on a standard of correctness.
This requires the Court to determine if the process followed by the Director
achieved the level of fairness required by the circumstances of the matter
(see: Suresh v Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), 2002
SCC 1 at para 115, [2002] 1 SCR 3).
[14]
As for the Director's decision as a whole, it is
settled law that a PRRA decision must be reviewed against a standard of
reasonableness (see, e.g.: Sing v Canada (MCI), 2007 FC 361 at para 55,
307 FTR 1; and Figurado v. Canada (Solicitor General), 2005 FC 347,
[2005] 4 FCR 387). This standard is applicable in addressing the third issue
below.
B.
Did the Director err and deny procedural
fairness by failing to have an oral hearing before making adverse and
determinative credibility findings?
[15]
It must be noted that a hearing is not
automatically mandated by paragraph 113(b) of the Act, which provides
that: “a hearing may be held if the
Minister, on the basis of prescribed factors, is of the opinion that a hearing
is required [emphasis added].” The Minister’s discretion in this regard
is somewhat constrained though by the prescribed factors set forth in section
167 of the Regulations, which stipulates:
Hearing – prescribed factors
Facteurs pour la tenue d’une audience
167. For the purpose of determining
whether a hearing is required under paragraph 113(b) of the Act, the factors
are the following:
167.
Pour l’application de l’alinéa 113b) de la Loi, les facteurs ci-après servent
à décider si la tenue d’une audience est requise :
(a) whether there is evidence that raises a serious issue
of the applicant's credibility and is related to the factors set out in
sections 96 and 97 of the Act;
a)
l’existence d’éléments de preuve relatifs aux éléments mentionnés aux
articles 96 et 97 de la Loi qui soulèvent une question importante en ce qui
concerne la crédibilité du demandeur;
(b) whether the evidence is central to the decision with
respect to the application for protection; and
b) l’importance
de ces éléments de preuve pour la prise de la décision relative à la demande
de protection;
(c) whether the evidence, if accepted, would justify
allowing the application for protection.
c) la
question de savoir si ces éléments de preuve, à supposer qu’ils soient admis,
justifieraient que soit accordée la protection.
[16]
Whether each of these three prescribed factors
must be present before a hearing “is required” is
another question upon which the Court’s jurisprudence diverges. For example, in
Mosavat v. Canada (Citizenship and Immigration), 2011 FC 647 at para 11,
203 ACWS (3d) 359, the Court stated that: “An oral
hearing is only required if all of the factors set out in s. 167 of the
Regulations are met (Bhallu v Canada (Solicitor General), 2004 FC 1324)”.
However, in Hurtado Prieto v Canada (Citizenship and Immigration), 2010
FC 253, 186 ACWS (3d) 205, the Court found that:
[30]      … section 167 describes two types
of circumstances where issues of credibility will require an oral hearing.
Paragraph (a) relates to the situation where evidence before the officer
directly contradicts an applicant’s story. Paragraphs (b) and (c), on the other
hand, essentially outline a test whereby one is to consider whether a positive
decision would have resulted but for the applicant’s credibility. In other
words, one needs to consider whether full and complete acceptance of the
applicant’s version of events would necessarily result in a positive decision.
If either test is met, an oral hearing is required.
[17]
In the present case, it is unnecessary to decide
whether all or merely some of the prescribed factors must be present before a
hearing “is required.” It is not necessary
because in view of FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, section 167 becomes operative
where credibility is an issue which could result in a negative PRRA decision;
the intent of the provision is to allow an applicant to face any credibility
concern which may be put in issue.
[18]
Unlike most refugee claimants, the Applicant
never had an oral hearing before the RPD because his claim was suspended
pending a determination as to his inadmissibility. Thus, in this case, the
Applicant has never had an opportunity to address any credibility concerns
about his fear of the Palestinian Authority.
[19]
The Applicant’s credibility was clearly at issue
in the following passage from the Director’s reasons:
Mr. Zmari’s actions are not consistent with
an individual who faces a risk to life, a risk of torture or a risk of cruel
and unusual treatment or punishment. Mr. Zmari willingly joined the Palestinian
Authority, and continued to carry our [sic] his duties within the General
Intelligence directorate, which included the arrest of persons suspected of
collaboration with the Israeli government or occupying forces, or persons
believed to act against the PA (generally, supporters of Hamas). He was
selected as a group of staff who traveled to the United States for specialized
training in the protection of VIPs, and performed this duty when former US
President Bill Clinton traveled to Jericho. It is not likely that this duty
would have been assigned to individuals suspected of being enemies of the
Palestinian Authority. On the contrary, it is more likely that persons selected
for this specialized training and related duties would be individuals who have
demonstrated their loyalty to the PA, and who were considered to be
trustworthy. Mr. Zmari’s narrative regarding the punishments he alleges to have
been subject to because of his insubordination does not correlate with his
selection for this specialized training overseas, his assignment to this duty,
or his promotions with the PA, such that he had obtained the rank of Sergeant
Major within five years.
[20]
The Director’s determination that the
Applicant’s narrative “does not correlate” with
his actions, assignments and promotions with the GID is an implicit rejection
of the Applicant’s story and a veiled credibility finding against him. The
punishments suffered by the Applicant at the hands of the GID are central to
his claim; he fears the Palestinian Authority because, if arrested, he would be
subject to torture for having deserted. Although the PRRA officer’s risk
assessment was not binding on the Director (see: Muhammad v Canada (Citizenship
and Immigration), 2014 FC 448, 454 FTR 161), it is nonetheless clear that
the Director, in making this veiled credibility finding against the Applicant,
disagreed with the PRRA officer’s acceptance of the Applicant’s story some five
and one-half years earlier. The Applicant’s evidence, if accepted (as it was by
the PRRA officer), could have grounded a claim for protection, and in these
circumstances, an oral hearing was required before the Director’s negative PRRA
decision was made (and, perhaps, all the more so because, as noted above, the
Applicant’s claim and his credibility had not been assessed by way of an oral
hearing before the RPD).
C.
Did the Director err by unreasonably
disregarding the evidence from the Applicant’s brother?
[21]
The Director’s decision states that: “In the absence of any additional supporting evidence, I find
the letter from Mr. Zmari’s brother to be self-serving, and I give it little
weight.” This determination is problematic, especially in the context of
this case where fairness dictated that a hearing should have been held before
the Director rejected the Applicant’s restricted PRRA application. The Director
is, of course, entitled to assign little or no weight to documentary evidence
based upon its reliability. However, by discounting or discrediting this letter
as “self-serving”, the Director in effect finds
that the veracity of its content is doubtful (see: Hamza v Canada (Citizenship
and Immigration), 2013 FC 264 at para 38, 429 FTR 93). This Court has
determined that a document said to be self-serving introduces “suspicion into the decision-making process,” and a
failure to provide an applicant with an opportunity to address concerns raised
by such a document can amount to a breach of the duty of fairness (see: Wen
v Canada (Citizenship and Immigration), 2013 FC 1159 at para 4, 235 ACWS
(3d) 785).
[22]
In my view, the Director’s treatment of this
letter is unreasonable and cannot be justified. It is tantamount to making yet
another veiled credibility finding which is neither transparent nor
justifiable. Characterizing this letter as self-serving casts doubt on the
credibility and independence of the Applicant’s brother, and the Director
should have explained why it deserved little weight. Furthermore, it serves to reinforce
the conclusion above that a hearing should have been conducted in the
circumstances of this case, not only to put this credibility concern to the
Applicant and receive a response, but also to assess the Applicant’s own
credibility vis-à-vis his fear of the Palestinian Authority and the reasons for
such fear.
V.
Conclusion
[23]
In view of the foregoing reasons, the
Applicant’s application for judicial review is granted, the Director’s decision
is set aside, and the matter returned for a new determination by a different
delegate of the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration. No question of general
importance is certified.
JUDGMENT
THIS COURT’S JUDGMENT is that: the
application for judicial review is allowed; the matter is returned to the
Minister of Citizenship and Immigration for redetermination by a different
director of case determination; and no question of general importance is
certified.
"Keith M. Boswell"
Judge
FEDERAL
COURT
SOLICITORS
OF RECORD
DOCKET:
IMM-564-15
STYLE OF CAUSE:
IMAD ZMARI v THE MINISTER OF CITIZENSHIP
AND IMMIGRATION
PLACE OF
HEARING:
Toronto, Ontario
DATE OF
HEARING:
November 30, 2015
JUDGMENT
AND REASONS:
BOSWELL J.
DATED:
february 4, 2016
APPEARANCES:
Kelsey Lange
For
The Applicant
James Todd
For
The Respondent
SOLICITORS OF RECORD:
Mamann, Sandaluk & Kingwell LLP
Barristers and Solicitors
Toronto, Ontario
For
The Applicant
William F. Pentney
Deputy Attorney General of Canada
Toronto, Ontario
For
The Respondent
