[71]
Sakimay also claims that it has aborig­inal rights recognized by s. 35, under Part II, of the
Constitution Act, 1982
which, pursu­ant to s. 25 of the
Charter
, are protected against the effects of any infringement of
Charter
rights or freedoms that those abo­riginal rights may entail. For the applicant it is urged that the evidence does not establish aboriginal rights within s. 35, but even if aboriginal rights were established they would not prevail over rights assured by the
Char­ter
, for s. 25 is subject to the application of s. 28 in a case such as this where the activity complained of constitutes discrimination based on gender. Section 28, it is urged, assures that provisions of the
Charter
, including s. 25, are subject to the equal guarantee of rights to male and female per­sons. Moreover, s. 35(4) provides that abo­riginal rights are guaranteed equally to male and female persons. The provisions referred to by the parties are:
"25. The guarantee in this Charter of cer­tain rights and freedoms shall not be con­strued so as to abrogate or derogate from any aboriginal, treaty or other rights or freedoms that pertain to the aboriginal peoples of Canada including
(a) any rights or freedoms that have been recognized by the Royal Proclamation of October 7, 1763; and
(b) any rights or freedoms that now exist by way of land claims agreements or may be so acquired.
"28. Notwithstanding anything in this Charter, the rights and freedoms referred to in it are guaranteed equally to male and female persons.
. . . . .
"35(1) The existing aboriginal and treaty rights of the aboriginal peoples of Canada are hereby recognized and affirmed.
"(2) In this Act, 'aboriginal peoples of Canada' includes the Indian, Inuit and Métis peoples of Canada.
"(3) For greater certainty, in subs. (1) 'treaty rights' includes rights that now exist by way of land claims agreements or may be so acquired.
"(4) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the aboriginal and treaty rights referred to in subs. (1) are guaranteed equally to male and female persons."
"25. Le fait que la présente charte garantit certains droits et libertés ne porte pas atteinte aux droits ou libertés - ancestraux, issus de traités ou autres - des peuples autochtones du Canada, notamment:
a) aux droits ou libertés reconnus par la proclamation royale du 7 octobre 1763;
b) aux droits ou libertés existants issus d'accords sur des revendications territoriales ou ceux susceptibles d'être ainsi acquis.
"28. Indépendamment des autres dispositions de la présente charte, les droits et libertés qui y sont mentionnés sont garantis également aux personnes des deux sexes.
. . . . .
"35(1) Les droits existants - ancestraux ou issus de traités - des peuples autochtones du Canada sont reconnus et confirmés.
"(2) Dans la présente loi, 'peuples autochtones du Canada' s'entend notamment des Indiens, des Inuit et des Métis du Canada.
"(3) Il est entendu que sont compris parmi les droits issus de traités, don't il est fait mention au paragraphe (1), les droits existants issus d'accords sur des revendications territoriales ou ceux susceptibles d'être ainsi acquis.
"(4) Indépendamment de toute autre disposition de la présente loi, les droits - ancestraux ou issus de traités - visés au paragraphe (1) sont garantis également aux personnes des deux sexes."