[78]
Remedies claimed by the applicant in her originating notice of motion include some not available in this court, ordinarily or at all. The remedies originally sought were later modified in an amended originating notice of motion, and by the Order [see footnote 35] of Rothstein, J., narrowing the scope of this proceeding. Those claims were again modified by the applicant's written and oral submissions at the hearing of this matter. I deal with those claims for relief, as finally defined at the hearing, in summary, as follows.
(i) The applicant's claim to certiorari quashing the 1997 decision of Sakimay denying the applicant's right to vote is dismissed, since in my view the issue is
moot
for the relief sought cannot at this stage provide any redress.
(ii) The applicant's claim to a declaration that Sakimay's Bill C-31 policy is ultra vires in that it violates ss. 7 and 15 of the
Charter
, ss. 6, 10 and 77 of the
Indian Act
and council's fiduciary duties is allowed in part, by Order now issued, that denial of the applicant's rights as a member of the Sakimay Band, in particular the right to vote in the Band council elections in 1997, because of her standing as a Bill C-31 member of the Band, was contrary to s. 77 of the
Indian Act
, and to the Sakimay Band Membership Code adopted under the
Act
, and it infringed on her rights secured by s. 15(1) of the
Charter
which infringement is not saved by s. 1 and which rights are not affected by any claim raised under s. 35(1) of the
Constitution Act, 1982
.
(iii) The applicant's request for mandamus to compel Sakimay to return the applicant's name to the Band list to be effective from the date her name was removed, is allowed in part. It is clear that the applicant's name was on the Band list at the time the Band assumed responsibility for maintaining the Band's list of members. The Band's authority to remove her name from the list simply because of her status as a Bill C-31 person, was prescribed by s. 10 of the
Indian Act
as enacted by Bill C-31 was agreed between the parties that at the time this matter was heard her name was not on the Band membership list. If her name is not now on the list, the Band is directed to add her name to the list to be effective from the date the Band assumed responsibility for its own membership and the list of its members.
(iv) The applicant's claim to mandamus to compel the Sakimay Band Council to enter her name on the Band voter's list for the 1999 elections and all future Band council elections is allowed in part. Since I understand the 1999 elections have been completed no order issues with specific reference to the list of voters for these elections. So long as Ms. Scrimbitt continues as a member of the Band she is entitled under s. 77 of the
Indian Act
, as it applies to other Band members, to vote in future elections and she shall not be deprived of the right to vote except as all other members are. The Order now issued provides for this.