[41] Mr. Kamal also completed a Schedule A Background Form in which he indicated that he became a general member of the BNP in February 2005, then Publicity Secretary for the BNP in October 2006 and held that position until August 2015 when he came to Canada. He also signed a declaration for this form that the information he gave was true, complete and correct. He then signed another declaration in the presence of an immigration officer on November 2, 2015 that the information was true, complete and correct. A Bengali interpreter signed a declaration that he/she faithfully and accurately interpreted the content of the application and any related forms to the person concerned.
[Emphasis added.]
[40]
As a result, the ID found that the Applicant’s attempt to distance himself from the BNP not credible; indeed the ID found it disingenuous. In my view, these findings are defensible on the record.
[41]
The Applicant pressed his allegation respecting non-membership in the BNP by referring to the RIR he located the night before the hearing discussed above. The ID sets out the circumstances and contents of the RIR as follows:
[43] As noted earlier, [Applicant’s counsel] stated that he informed the Minister prior to the hearing that Mr. Kamal intended to concede being a member of the BNP. It was only after [Applicant’s counsel] found the RIR the night before the hearing that Mr. Kamal changed his position. This would imply that Mr. Kamal only realized that he was not a member of the BNP because [Applicant’s counsel] discovered the RIR. Otherwise, he erroneously believed for the past 12 years that he was a member and Publicity Secretary for the BNP. This lacks credibility and I find Mr. Kamal’s last-minute change to be disingenuous.
[44] During his testimony, Mr. Kamal said that he was Publicity Secretary for the Jubo Dal for only two years between October 2006 and October 2008, after which he became a general member. This conflicts with his Schedule A Background form in which he declared he became a general member of the BNP in February 2005 and Publicity Secretary for the BNP in October 2006. Mr. Kamal testified that he simply made a mistake in the form naming the BNP instead of the Jubo Dal because he does not speak English. This makes no sense. The name “Jatiyatabadi Jubo Dal” is not English whereas “Bangladesh Nationalist Party” is. Alternatively, if he did not understand the question in the form, this does not explain why then he gave the same information in his narrative attached to the Basis of Claim Form. Even more to the point, he confirmed that he completed the forms with the assistance of a lawyer and interpreter. He was evasive when confronted with the fact that he had made corrections to other information in the form and initialed those corrections, yet had made no correction to identifying himself as a BNP member. He said that someone from his lawyer’s office made the corrections and that he just initialed them. He could not explain, however, how that person knew to make those corrections. I do not find this credible.
[45] I find that the information in his refugee claim documents is more reliable since this is the information he provided in the first instance, prepared in writing with the assistance of a lawyer and interpreter, prior to this admissibility hearing where it is now in his interest to deny his membership and level of involvement in the BNP.
[46] I find on reasonable grounds that Mr. Kamal was a member of the Jubo Dal and that, throughout his membership and beyond, he understood that being a member of the Jubo Dal meant that he was also a member of the BNP.
[Emphasis added.]