[64]
The ID considered the Applicant’s argument that it was only “fringe” or “rogue” members of the BNP who engaged in acts of violence and that they did so without any authority from the BNP. However, the ID found that there was no evidence that it was only “fringe” or “rogue” members who committed violence, finding on the evidence:
[69] Mr. Kamal argued that it was “fringe” or “rogue” members of the BNP who committed acts of violence and that they did so without the “blessing” or authority of the BNP. As such, the BNP cannot be understood as an organization that engaged in these activities.
[70] There is no evidence that it was only “fringe” or “rogue” members who committed violence. What the evidence does show is that the BNP did grant its “blessing” on the commission of violence because they kept calling for hartals despite the fact doing so had become synonymous with declaring ‘open season’ on violence whether committed by BNP members, supporters or others. The BNP continued to use hartals as a way of exerting pressure and, even in the midst of hartal-related violence, actually called for hartals to be extended.
[71] Mr. Berger attempted to elicit evidence from Mr. Kamal that the BNP is not responsible for the violence committed by its members by asking him to estimate how many people in Bangladesh are Jubo Dal and BNP members. Mr. Kamal estimated 900,000. Mr. Berger asked Mr. Kamal whether he thought that when the BNP calls for a hartal, it can control the actions of its 900,000 members. Mr. Kamal answered, “It is not possible.” If it was not possible for the BNP to control its 900,000 members and yet calling for hartals had become synonymous with calling for violence, this only leads me to believe that the BNP is even more responsible for unleashing uncontrollable mass violence.
[72] There is evidence that Khaleda Zia denounced violence around the hartals, but to be clear, she did so only insofar that she “continued to pin the blame entirely on members of the Awami League in spite of credible allegations that members of her own party are involved in these attacks.” […]