[10]
The critical question in this appeal is whether the Prothonotary erred in concluding that there was no decision of the Secretariat. The Prothonotary dealt with this point at length in her decision as follows:
"The principle and ultimate issue to be determined by the Court on this judicial review application is whether the Treasury Board is legally bound to apply to the FLI-FIT group the retroactive wage adjustments made in respect of the Public Service CR-5 group ¼
The main thrust of the Applicant's argument has therefore been centered on the fact that, in her amended application, the Applicant specifically seeks judicial review of a purported decision of the Treasury Board Secretariat on behalf of the President of the Treasury Board to refuse to make the wage adjustment. The relief sought in respect to the TBS decision has however been overtaken by the Respondent's recent advice that it is now taking the position that no decision had been made by the TBS in respect of the wage adjustment. The Applicant initially accepted the Respondent's position and advised in consequence, in counsel's letter of June 30, 2004, that she would withdraw the prayer for relief set out in paragraphs 3 to 6 of her application seeking that the TBS decision be set aside. The parties' revised positions effectively lead to the result that there is no longer any decision of the TBS under judicial review, and no possible application of Rule 317.
However, upon further consideration, the Applicant has retreated from her June 30, 2004 position and maintains that, as the evidence shows that the TBS did make a decision, it is not open to the Respondent to take the position that a decision was not made. The Applicant therefore maintains that the TBS decision remains the subject of this judicial review application.
The Applicant argues that the Respondent's about-face is purely an attempt to shield relevant documents from disclosure under Rule 317. This may be so, but whatever the motivation, the net effect is to render the application, as it relates to the alleged TBS decision moot; it allows the application to proceed directly to the essential issue of whether the Treasury Board, in the absence of a decision by the TBS, is bound to extend the retroactive benefits of the wage adjustment to the FLI-FIT group.
. . . . .
I conclude that there is, in effect, no decision of the TBS subject to this judicial review application."