[8]
It is appropriate to reproduce the following excerpt from pages 32 to 34 of the adjudicator's decision:
[TRANSLATION]
"The undersigned adjudicator also had the opportunity to acquaint himself with the various authorities cited by the parties at the hearing as well as those found in the above-noted case law, and he has concluded that the request of counsel for the complainant should be granted in part.
"In fact, the consequences of the employer's attitude towards the complainant are significant because they contributed to the deterioration of his health, and the complainant is still suffering from those consequences three years after his period of disability began.
. . . . .
"It appears to the undersigned adjudicator that, after reading the reports from its own expert psychiatrist, Dr. Béliveau, the employer was aware of the link between the complainant's disability and the conflict he was experiencing in the workplace. It must be recalled that the complainant would be examined a second time by Dr. Béliveau at the employer's request on June 15, 1998, and on June 30, the company sent the employee its decision to terminate his employment contract. Why such haste? Based on the findings of its own expert, Cogéco should have realized it was implicated in the complainant's medical condition, and especially that his return to work was incompatible with 'the current organizational framework of the company.'
"Therefore, Cogéco disregarded the entire problem of the impact of the workplace organization on the health of its employee-an employee who was a strong performer, whose disciplinary file showed a spotless record, and who had given close to ten years of loyal service to the company.
"Add to this the fact that this hearing required 15 days, including submissions, the attendance of numerous medical experts with everything that entails in terms of examinations and cross-examinations, the costs of the attendance of such experts before the adjudicator. In short, all these considerations lead the undersigned adjudicator to conclude that, in terms of the case law, we are dealing with an exceptional situation here and the complainant should be compensated as a result."