[20]
These are the relevant principles that I kept in mind when considering the applicant's submission within the factual context of this case. On that point, the applicant restricted itself to filing a stack of decisions in proceedings where Adjudicator DeBlois for the most part represented interests related more to employees than to employers. However, the vast majority of those proceedings dealt only with rules of professional conduct for police. The balance of the proceedings indicate that Adjudicator DeBlois has as a lawyer not only acted for workers, but also for employers on some occasions. Although the number of decisions filed is relatively large, nothing in the evidence enables us to determine how significant this type of proceeding is to Adjudicator DeBlois' law practice. The evidence also does not establish any link between the adjudicator and either the applicant or the respondent. The applicant is not criticizing the behaviour or the comments of the adjudicator concerning the respondent's complaint. The
Canada Labour Code
itself does not contain a code of ethics governing an adjudicator appointed under its s. 242, nor does the applicant cite any violation of any separate code of ethics directly applicable to this adjudicator. In this context as a whole, after hearing counsel for the parties and reviewing all the evidence, I have been unable to find anything that would lead an informed person, viewing the matter realistically and practically - and having thought the matter through - to conclude that a reasonable apprehension of bias exists. The fact that the adjudicator's decision - which is well reasoned and contains an elaborate and sound analysis of both the medical evidence and other testimony - does not refer specifically to all the passages from the evidence that the applicant would have liked, does not give rise to an appearance of bias. Clearly, the adjudicator cannot be criticized under the circumstances, after a fifteen-day hearing, for not mentioning everything explicitly.