[21]
Lastly, in light of s. 242(1) of the
Code
, which provides that the Minister may appoint any person that the Minister considers appropriate to hear and adjudicate on the complaint, I am of the view, under the circumstances and in the absence of provisions regarding the degree of independence required of this adjudicator in his enabling legislation, that it was completely appropriate for the Minister to consider that a lawyer with experience in labour law, like Mr. DeBlois, would be an acceptable choice to perform this particular duty. This opinion is based in large part on the following remarks made, first, by Chief Justice McLachlin in the Supreme Court of Canada case
Ocean Port Hotel Ltd. v. Liquor Control and Licensing Branch (B.C.)
, [2001] S.C.J. No. 17; 274 N.R. 116; 155 B.C.A.C. 193; 254 W.A.C. 193; 2001 SCC 52, at paragraph 20:
"This conclusion, in my view, is inescapable. It is well established that, absent constitutional constraints, the degree of independence required of a particular government decision maker or tribunal is determined by its enabling statute. It is the legislature or Parliament that determines the degree of independence required of tribunal members. The statute must be construed as a whole to determine the degree of independence the legislature intended."
and also by Mr. Justice Evans, in
Air Canada v. Lorenz et al.
, [2000] 1 F.C. 494; 175 F.T.R. 211 (T.D.), a decision of the Federal Court of Appeal, at pages 506-07 [F.C.]:
"[28] Counsel for Air Canada conceded that the question on which he has asked the Court to rule is largely one of first impression. While there is no authority directly on point, he argued that in
R. v. Lippé
, [1991] 2 S.C.R. 114, the Supreme Court of Canada expressed the view that, in the absence of adequate safeguards, the appointment of part-time judges who continued their legal practice breached the constitutional requirement of institutional impartiality and independence.
"[29] It is an open question whether similar concerns are applicable to specialized administrative tribunals. For example, a consequence of a finding that Mr. Marchessault was disqualified by bias from acting as an adjudicator in this case would be that lawyers practising labour and employment law would be generally ineligible for an appointment under s. 240 of the
Canada Labour Code
. This might result in the loss of a valuable source of relevant expertise. However, in the absence of any evidence about the frequency with which adjudicators are appointed from the ranks of practising labour and employment lawyers I can make no finding on this point.
"[30] Of course, a claim is not doomed to failure by virtue of its legal novelty or the practical fall-out from its success. Nonetheless, the fact is that no court appears to have been called upon before to rule on the question raised by Air Canada in this proceeding. This may be some evidence that at least labour and employment law practitioners do not regard combining the duties of an adjudicator and a lawyer practising in the area as giving rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias, especially when, as here, the adjudicator in his legal practice represents both management and employees.
"[31] However, I should state again that there was no evidence before me about the prevalence of the appointment of adjudicators who actively practise labour and employment law. Hence, I do not know how often this occurs. Indeed, the only evidence in the record on the issue is the expression of surprise by a partner in the law firm representing Air Canada in this matter that an adjudicator was also actively practising labour and employment law. This suggests that it may be unusual for adjudicators also to represent clients in this area of the law.
"[32] Air Canada did not satisfy me that this is a clear and obvious case of bias. On the other hand, it clearly cannot be characterized as frivolous either. The concerns expressed in
Lippé
, supra, and, to a lesser extent, codes of ethics from other jurisdictions put into evidence by counsel, suggest that Air Canada's allegation of bias is by no means fanciful."