[17]
In
Air Canada v. Lorenz et al.
(1999), 175 F.T.R. 211 (T.D.), Evans, J., refused to make a determination on an allegation of bias against an adjudicator in an unjust dismissal claim before the adjudicator had rendered a final decision:
"[13] As a general rule, it is much more difficult nowadays for a litigant to persuade a court to intervene before the applicant has exhausted the available administrative remedies than it was when
Bell v. Ontario (Human Rights Commission)
, [1971] S.C.R. 756 was decided.
"[14] Thus, relief may be refused on the ground that a litigant has not taken advantage of a right of appeal to an administrative tribunal when this is an adequate alternative remedy to an application for judicial review, even when the ground of review is the wrongful denial of a participatory right in breach of the duty of fairness (
Harelkin v. University of Regina
, [1979] 2 S.C.R. 561), or even a substantive jurisdictional error (
Canadian Pacific Limited v. Matsqui Indian Band
, [1995] 1 S.C.R. 3).
"[15] Courts are similarly reluctant to intervene to review an interim or interlocutory decision prior to the conclusion of the proceeding before the administrative tribunal. There are a number of cases in which relief has been refused when the applicant has challenged the proceeding of a human rights tribunal prior to its rendering a final decision, including some involving allegations of bias: see, for example,
Ontario College of Art v. Ontario (Ontario Human Rights Commission)
(1992), 99 D.L.R.(4th) 738 (Ont. Div. Ct.).
. . . . .
"[18] ... the exercise of the Court's discretion here turns principally on a weighing of two competing considerations. On the one hand are the possible hardships caused to Air Canada, and the time and resources that will have been wasted, if the bias question is not determined prior to the completion of the proceeding before the adjudicator. On the other hand, there are the adverse consequences of delaying the administrative process and of countenancing a multiplicity of litigation."