[19]
There is no disagreement that the Policy Manual applies to the relationship between Mr. North and WRCFS. The parties differ on the procedure to be followed for dismissal of Mr. North. Of relevance to this application is Clause 23 of the Policy Manual which deals with "Discipline: Suspensions: Dismissals: Termination of Employment". The clause, in its entirety, is set out below.
23. Discipline: Suspensions: Dismissals: Termination of employment
The following conditions may lead to disciplinary action, suspension, dismissal, and/or termination of employment:
a) unsatisfactory job performance as evaluated by the employee's supervisor and/or Executive Co- ordinator; in the case of the Executive Co-ordinator, the Board
b) theft of the property of a client or the employer
c) being on the job under the influence of alcohol or drugs
d) making false entries on agency records
e) fighting
f) absence without leave
g) negligence and/or misuse of equipment
h) commission of an act which, in the opinion WRCFS Inc., is detrimental to WRCFS Inc.
i) disregard for the mandatory employee conduct policy as outlined in the policy manual
j) unexpected financial restraints which preclude the payment of salaries
k) charge and/or conviction of a criminal offense
l) obtaining the employment of false pretenses
In the event of necessary staff cuts, continuation of employment will be determined by the Board and the Executive Co-ordinator on the basis of length of service, qualifications, experience, and job performance.
Generally, a system of progressive discipline will be used, which may include three written warnings, suspensions with or without pay, and then termination.
Alternatives to termination, when appropriate, (ie: treatment of alcohol abuse) shall be approved by the Board upon recommendation of management.
The Executive Co-ordinator may suspend an employee, with notification to the Board preferably within 24 hours, but no later than 3 days after suspension.
Termination for social services staff will be a joint decision of the WRCFS Executive Co-ordinator and the Chief and Council and/or CFS Committee of the Band(s) at which the employee is delivering services
.
Termination for clerical support staff may be a decision of the RCFS Executive Co-ordinator.
Termination of supervisory personnel will be a Board decision, upon recommendation by the Executive Co-ordinator.
Termination and/or disciplinary action of the Executive Co-ordinator will be done by the Board of Directors.
Employees may be dismissed outright for "just cause"
.
In the event of a dismissal for "just cause" there is not requirement for two weeks pay in lieu of notice. [Emphasis added.]