[5]
The relevant portions of subsection 19(1) of the
Immigration Act
[see footnote 1] read as follows:
"19(1) No person shall be granted admission who is a member of any of the following classes:
(a) persons, who are suffering from any disease, disorder, disability or other health impairment as a result of the nature, severity or probable duration of which, in the opinion of a medical officer concurred in by at least one other medical officer,
. . . . .
(ii) their admission would cause or might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services;" [see footnote 2]
"19(1) Les personnes suivantes appartiennent à une catégorie non admissible:
a) celles qui souffrent d'une maladie ou d'une invalidité don't la nature, la gravité ou la durée probable sont telles qu'un médecin agréé, don't l'avis est confirmé par au moins un autre médecin agréé, conclut:
. . . . .
(ii) soit que leur admission entraînerait ou risquerait d'entraîner un fardeau excessif pour les services sociaux ou de santé;"
The Officer sent a "fairness letter" to the applicant, dated the 22nd of March 2000, providing the applicant with an opportunity to respond to the Medical Notification. The substance of the "fairness letter" reads as follows:
"I have received a medical notification stating your son, Gavin Martin Hilewitz, is suffering from developmental delay. The opinion of a medical officer regarding his medical condition, concurred in by at least one other medical officer, is stated as follows:
[As quoted earlier in these reasons.]
"This information leads me to conclude that your dependant can be expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services in Canada. For this reason, I could refuse your application for permanent residence.
"Before I make a decision whether Gavin is inadmissible, you may respond to the description of his medical conditions with new medical information of your own."
The applicant was provided a reasonable period of time to respond with new medical information. He was directed to provide any response to the medical officer who initiated the Medical Notification.