[6]
The applicant did respond to the "fairness letter". In his own letter, covering additional materials, the applicant wrote:
"We cannot deny that Gavin does not function as a 17 year old in all facets of his behaviour and ability. At the same time, whilst he was born with minimal brain damage, many of his functional abilities are normal and way beyond the maturity of an 8 year old."
Under the heading "Physical Medical Health", the applicant wrote:
"His general medical health has been that of a healthy normal person that very rarely requires medical attention as born (sic) out in the enclosed letter from our General Practitioner, Dr. M. Blumberg."
Under the heading "Schooling", the applicant wrote in part:
"He has required specialized education for the past nine years during which period we have never resorted to any institutional assistance or social services available in South Africa.
. . . . .
"As demonstrated we have never been a drain on any institutional or social service structure to support our son and cannot conceivably ever contemplate any change to this ethos in the future."
The applicant continued under the heading "Scholastic Skills":
"Gavin excels in subject matters that interest him. Throughout the majority of his lifetime he has had a passion for natural history and has an amazing retentive memory for the names and habits of the various species of dinosaurs, sharks and other reptiles beyond the knowledge of most adults.
"With the advent of the Internet, we have installed a computer at home for his personal use. He has been able in a short space of time to independently access the Internet, to browse websites of interest to himself, to print the contents thereof, save information and open and close files without the requirement of our assistance.
"We believe that constant encouragement from ourselves, coupled with his acumen in operating a computer, will be major tools in expanding his education and general knowledge."
Under the headings "Social Skills", "Future Prognosis" and "Vocational Training", the applicant continues:
"We have enclosed a letter from a psychologist whom we asked to meet and assess Gavin. To expand on this we would like you to know the following. Gavin is a delightful person who draws people to himself through his friendliness and sincerity of spirit. For many years he has been dropped by us at our local shopping mall where he does his own shopping, goes to movies, restaurants, internet cafes and video arcades, with or without a friend from his school. In the process he manages his money well, enjoys himself and telephones us when he is ready to be collected. Similarly, he goes to ten pin bowling, to the zoo and the war museum (in which he has a passionate interest).
. . . . .
"Furtherance of his education is vitally important. This will manifest itself through a combination of private schooling and continuous training on the computer where the cyberworld library is so vast that it can only widen his general knowledge, reading skills and make use of the wide range of educational tools available.
"With regard to schooling, we have on our previous trips to Toronto, identified potential schooling, the costs thereof and most importantly whether Gavin would fit their criteria. We even had an interview with Gavin present at the Shore Institute of Learning at which we had a very positive response with regard to them educating Gavin. If granted a visa, we would explore the many other options available in private schooling without requesting or needing any financial assistance.
. . . . .
"There is no doubt that Gavin will have to have sheltered employment. As my background is that of a person who has been involved in many businesses and industries over my working life of 30 years, it is my intention to establish or purchase as one of my business interests a business to accommodate Gavin's future. For example, I would seriously consider purchasing a Video Game/Toy Franchise employing experienced management and to include Gavin in that operation where he could demonstrate home video games at which he is far above the average user of such products."
Finally, after commenting on the commitment of three other children of he and his wife, all older than Gavin, the applicant concludes:
"In conclusion we wish to point out that we are very proud and independent people who have endured hard times and enjoyed very successful times. Throughout these times we have always been independent and focused on Gavin's well being, security and happiness. We assure you that this will never change."