[13]
In
Wong v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
[see footnote 3], my colleague Mr. Justice McKeown had before him an application for judicial review of a decision of a visa officer whereby the visa officer rejected, for the third time, the applicant's application for permanent residence in Canada on the ground that the applicant's daughter suffered from mild to moderate "mental retardation" (now referred to as "developmental delay" or "cognitive impairment") and Down's Syndrome thus leading two medical officers to the opinion that her admission would or might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on social services in Canada. Justice McKeown notes that one of the issues raised before him was whether or not the visa officer had erred in failing to consider the applicant's daughter in her "uniqueness" with respect to social services. At paragraph 5 of his reasons, Mr. Justice McKeown noted an earlier decision of Madam Justice Reed arising out of the rejection of the applicant's second application for permanent residence in Canada. He wrote:
"On the application for judicial review of the August 1996 decision, Reed, J., allowed the application finding that there was a breach of procedural fairness as a result of the applicant not being given answers to the questions he had posed about the doctor's opinion that his daughter's admission to Canada would place 'excessive demands' on Canadian social services. Reed, J., stated at paragraph 26:
'Most significant is the non-disclosure to the applicant of information concerning the basis on which the opinion was rendered. The applicant and his counsel wished to respond to the conclusion that admission of the daughter to Canada would as a result of her medical condition, cause excessive demands on social services. In order to do this in an intelligent way they needed to know what factors were considered relevant. In my view, the non-disclosure of the requested information constituted a breach of natural justice [and] is a breach of the rules of fairness.'
"Reed, J., also noted that under
Ontario's Developmental Services Act
, Canadian residents who are able to do so are required to pay for the social services that are in question. She also commented in obiter on the need to consider an individual's particular circumstances. At paragraph 31 she states:
'Having come to this conclusion, it is not, strictly speaking, necessary to consider the other issues that counsel raised. I do note, however, that under subparagraph 19(1)(a)(ii), it is the admission of the individual that is to be assessed in determining whether excessive demands would be or might reasonably be expected to arise. I read that provision as requiring a consideration of the individual's particular circumstances, including in this case the applicant's offer to set up a trust fund.
'Counsel for the respondent argues that individual circumstances (particularly above average financial resources) should not be taken into account when assessing medical inadmissibility because our medical and social services are predicated on the principle that all individuals are equally entitled, and that advantages should not accrue in these areas to some individuals simply because they are wealthier than others. The force of that argument is strong. However, the category under which the applicant has been approved for permanent residence (sic) status is the self-employed category, that is, he has been approved because of his financial resources and entrepreneurial experience.
There does seem to be an incongruity between admitting someone as a permanent resident because he has significant financial resources bur refusing to take into account those same resources when assessing the admissibility of a dependent. This is particularly true if Canadian residents themselves must pay for the social services if they can afford to do so
." (emphasis added)