[14]
After quoting subparagraph 19(1)(a)(ii) of the
Immigration Act
, as reproduced earlier in these reasons, Mr. Justice McKeown continued at paragraphs 18 to 22 and 26 of his reasons:
"In
Deol v. MEI
, [1992] 18 Imm. L.R.(2d) 1 (F.C.A.), MacGuigan, J., held that the fact of mental retardation alone is not the relevant factor but the degree and probable consequences of that degree of retardation for excessive demands
on government services
. Also, in
Ismaili v. MCI
, [1995] 29 Imm. L.R.(2d) 1, Cullen, J., considered
the social services in the particular region of Canada where the applicant wished to settle
. Cullen, J., in that case also stated that:
'
The visa officer - wholly apart from the decision of the medical officers - is obliged to consider whether the applicant's medical condition would place excessive demands on health or social services. The visa officer, without second guessing the medical, diagnostic opinion, must consider all of the available evidence
.'
"Furthermore, in
Poste v. MCI
, [1995] F.C.A. No. 1805 (T.D.) Cullen, J., held that
each and every applicant should be looked at in their 'uniqueness'
.
"The applicant submits that family support ought to be considered, but that it was not considered in this case. Allegedly the medical officers based their opinion on eligibility for services alone and there is wording in the medical notification and refusal letter such as 'eligible for ... services' and 'likely to require ... services'.
The applicant submits that without a reasonably direct inquiry as to family support and the intentions of the applicant vis-à-vis his dependents, no intelligent answer can be made to the statement 'likely to require'. In this case, the applicant made it very clear that there would be no community involvement in the care of his daughter.
"In my view the respondent did not err in failing to consider family support. Dr. Giovinazzo specifically explains in his December 31, 1998 letter that they were aware of the family support for the daughter in this case. Notwithstanding this support, however, the officers were of the opinion that social services outside the home would be required to assist the individual to be more independent and learn to interact with others. The letter also clearly indicates that the daughter's specific circumstances were taken into account.
"The health services that the daughter may require is not at issue in the case before me. With respect to social services, one has to be considered eligible, and such application entails consideration of 'whether the applicant is able to contribute to all or any part of the cost thereof' (
Developmental Services Act
, R.S.O. 1990, c. E-2). Thus, the applicant will likely be required to pay for any services used because he has the means to do so. Thus no demands will be caused by the admission of the applicant with respect to social services.
"The jurisprudence is split on the question of whether the wealth of the applicant should be taken into account in assessing excessive demands on social services. While in
Ching Ho Poon v. MCI
, [2000] F.C.J. No 1993 (T.D.) Pelletier, J., found that wealth was not relevant, in my view the better approach was that taken by Reed, J., in the earlier
Wong
decision when she found that it would be incongruous to admit somebody as a permanent resident because he has significant financial resources but then refuse to take into account these same resources when assessing the admissibility of the dependant. This approach would not be applicable in the case of medical services but it is applicable with respect to social services.
. . . . .
"In the case before me the officers identified the medical condition and then identified a broad range of social services which normally would be made available and would benefit her. The officers held such service to be more than the normal services utilized and therefore excessive. However, the response of Dr. Giovinazzo and the decision letter of the officer do not indicate that there was any consideration of which specific services would be available in the particular community in which the applicant chose to settle.
In my view it is important to note that we are talking about the social services here and not medical services. In Canada one is not permitted to obtain medical services on a private basis. However, there is no such restriction in the social services and as was shown by
Ontario's Development Services Act
, persons who can afford to pay for social services must pay for them. Accordingly, since there is no evidence before me that the medical officers or the visa officer considered the specific services available in the particular community where the applicant chose to reside, this constitutes a reviewable error
." (emphasis added)