[30]
During the course of the hearing, counsel for the applicant indicated that he wished to expand the reliefs sought and to modify the claim for costs to costs on a solicitor and client basis. At the request of the Court, counsel confirmed the modification of the reliefs sought in a letter addressed to the Court and copied to counsel for the respondent. The substance of the communication to the Court is in the following terms:
"The applicant wishes to have the prayer for leave [relief] amended so that in the event of success, not only should certiorari be granted, quashing the decision of Virginia Hughes, but a mandamus issued to send the matter back for re-processing in accordance with the
Immigration Act
and
Regulations
upon the following terms:
a. That there be no need for further medical examination of the defendant, Gavin Hilewitz, in respect to his health condition of being developmentally delayed or mentally retarded.
b. That any medical opinion issued concerning developmental delay or mental retardation of the dependant, Gavin Hilewitz, if any, be based upon the following criteria:
i. That Gavin be assessed as a dependant and not an independent applicant;
ii. That the demand for services, if any, should relate to the place of destination;
iii. That the suggested use of social services, if any, be based on the probability that such services will be used by the Hilewitz family;
iv. That the social services so specified shall be of a compulsory nature, that is to say that the dependant shall require the services and have no option but to utilize those services;
v. That the services alleged to be probably utilized will be specified in both a cost evaluation and scarcity evaluation based upon the location of destination, i.e., Toronto.
c. That the findings of this court, including those facts in the affidavit of the applicant, upon which there was no cross-examination, form the factual framework in which the opinion is to be granted.
d. That the opinion by the medical department, if any, be delivered within thirty days of the date of the order of this court and in the above terms. Thereafter, the applicant be permitted a further thirty days to provide any answer rebutting or negativing the said opinion, if any, and in turn, that the Respondent shall take such rebuttal evidence into account and demonstrate in writing why it does not apply, again within thirty days.
e. In the event the report from the medical doctors, in respect to probable use of social services, is not delivered to the applicant's solicitor as aforesaid within thirty days, then the matter shall proceed towards the issue of the visa, as if no such opinion were forthcoming."