[11]
The decision under review here is in the form of a bare denial letter dated June 1, 2005. The background to the decision is, however, contained within the file notes which are part of the Record. The Removal Officer summarized her decision in the following passage found in the case history notes which state:
As shown by case history, subject has demonstrated complete disregard and contempt of the immigration process, but she has been given ample and extensive opportunity, time and time again, to obtain passports for her children that she wishes to be with her. This officer has no objection of allowing the children to travel with her and the department will purchase the airline tickets for them, if subject states she can’t afford it. Upon talking to children’s aid, I advised I would defer removal if they were able to find the children’s passports and or birth certificates and apply for the passports. CAS worker was to get back to me. I left CAS worker a message, upon receiving confirmation from the Philippine Consulate that they were ready to issue travel document, asking if she had been able to obtain any documentation for the children. That call was never returned.
The new AFL was applied for after subject failed to report. Counsel was sent copies of call-ins, etc and still client never showed.
THERE IS A COPY OF THE ONE CHILD’S BIRTH CERTIFICATE ON FILE, THEREFORE SUBJECT ALREADY HAS BIRTH CERTIFICATES. She again is trying to circumvent removal, by stating that she doesn’t have birth certificates as per counsel’s May 31st, 2005 letter.
Subject has had over 1 year to obtain the children’s passports. There has been over 3 instances where subject could have been arrested and detained, but was not, due to the children. The department has tried to be as accommodating as possible, but subject refuses to cooperate and has by her own actions, put herself in the situation of being separated from her children. If subject is so worried about her children, why then would she put herself in this situation. I believe she is using the children for her own benefit, not theirs. Subject also has 6 children she left in the Philippines. (Their emphasis)