[12]
The Removal Officer’s final case history notes set out above do not constitute the entire record of her activity, and her consideration of the children in response to the Applicant’s request for a deferral of removal. It is clear from other file notes that she was in consultation with CAS. In other notes to the file, she reported as follows:
Received message from GFX stating Children’s Aid had been in contact with her, stating children can’t stay with common-law husband.
…
Talked to refugee law office – Elana & advised PC to have children’s ppts’ delivered to IHC if she wished them to travel with her. Ok Birth certificates and ppt applications signed by common-law. I would not defer removal until H & C done. PC filed after no-show for removal. Also the removal cancelled as she did not obtain T. DOCS for herself or her children. PC trying all delay tactics to avoid removal. Elana advised she’d tell PC to have whatever docs for kids delivered.
…
Gina Fargnoli at TIHC called and advised that Children’s Aid had called her stating that the children were not able to stay with subject’s boyfriend, who is not father of children.
Gina talked to PC and found out that she has not obtained passports for the children for the children and that the children were okay where they were.
Gina then talked to Children’s Aid, Michelle Lawrence 416-395-1931, who stated that the boyfriend called them, as he stated he couldn’t take care of them. Gina advised that we did not want the children in the detention centre, as subject has used them to delay her removal from Canada. Gina advised that they could come for the weekend, but must leave afterwards. If no one picked them up, then she would call Children’s Aid to deal with them.
I called Michelle Lawrence and she advised that biological father is not in the picture. He has a wife and subject does not trust either to take care of her children. Boyfriend has been on seen [sic] for 9 months. He stated he can’t take care of children. Michelle is going to talk to boyfriend and find out if the children have passports. She will make attempt to obtain passports for the children, if they don’t have them. I reitereated [sic] to Michelle concerning the amount of time and opportunities that we have given subject to obtain these documents.
Issue
Did the Removal Officer properly exercise her discretion with respect to the Applicant’s deferral request, having particular regard to the interests of her two Canadian children?
Analysis