[18]
The legal principles that apply to this situation were thoroughly addressed by Justice de Montigny in his earlier decision to stay the removal order in question. I accept his statement of this obligation as set out at paragraphs 37 to 40 of that decision:
37 Having said all of this, if the best interest of the child is to be taken seriously, some consideration must be given to their fate when one or both of their parents are to be removed from this country. As is often the case, I believe that the solution lies somewhere in between the two extreme positions espoused by the parties. While an absolute bar on the removal of the parent would not be warranted, an approach precluding the removals officers to give any consideration to the situation of a child would equally be unacceptable.
38 I tend to agree with my colleague Justice Snider that the consideration of the best interests of the child is not an all or nothing exercise, but should be seen as a continuum. While a full-fledged analysis is required in the context of an H & C application, a less thorough examination may be sufficient when other types of decisions are made. Because of section 48 of the Act and of its overall structure, I would also agree with her that the obligation of a removals officer to consider the interests of Canadian-born children must rest at the lower end of the spectrum (John v. Canada (M.C.I.), [2003] F.C.J. No. 583).
39 When assessing an H & C application, the immigration officer must weigh the long term best interests of the child. A useful guide as to the factors that can be taken into consideration is provided in Chapter IP 5 (Immigrant Applications in Canada Made on humanitarian or Compassionate Grounds) of the Immigration Manual, published by Immigration and Citizenship Canada. Factors related to the emotional, social, cultural and physical well-being of the child are to be taken into consideration. Examples of factors that can be taken into account include the age of the child, the level of dependency between the child and the H & C applicant, the degree of the child's establishment in Canada, the child's links to the country in relation to which the H & C decision is being considered, the medical issues or special needs the child may have, the impact to the child's education, and matters related to the child's gender. In a nutshell, to quote from Décary. J.A. in Hawthorne v. Canada (M.C.I.) ([2003] 2 F.C. 555, at par. 6), "...the officer's task is to determine, in the circumstances of each case, the likely degree of hardship to the child caused by the removal of the parent and to weigh this degree of hardship together with other factors, including public policy considerations, that militate in favour of or against the removal of the parent".
40 This is obviously not the kind of assessment that the removals officer is expected to undertake when deciding whether the enforcement of the removal order is "reasonably practicable". What he should be considering, however, are the short term best interests of the child. For example, it is certainly within the removal officer's discretion to defer removal until a child has terminated his or her school year, if he or she is going with his or her parent. Similarly, I cannot bring myself to the conclusion that the removal officer should not satisfy himself that provisions have been made for leaving a child in the care of others in Canada when parents are to be removed. This is clearly within his mandate, if section 48 of the IRPA is to be read consistently with the Convention on the Rights of the Child. To make enquiries as to whether a child will be adequately looked after does not amount to a fulsome H & C assessment and in no way duplicates the role of the immigration officer who will eventually deal with such an application (see Boniowski v. Canada (M.C.I), (2004) F.C.J. No. 1397).