[5]
The history of the Board is set out in the decision of
Manitoba Society of Seniors Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General)
(1991), 70 Man.R.(2d) 141; 35 C.P.R.(3d) 66 (Q.B.), at 69-71 (Man. Q.B.), affd. (1992), 81 Man.R.(2d) 159; 30 W.A.C. 159; 45 C.P.R.(3d) 194 (C.A.), to which I was directed by counsel for the applicants. Given that this court has not been called upon to review many decisions of the Board, I have decided to reproduce Mr. Justice Dureault's summary in its entirety:
"A brief historical review of the patent legislation affecting medicines will be found relevant to the circumstances under which the impugned provisions were enacted. The
Patent Act
, S.C. 1923, c. 23, s. 17, allowed for compulsory licenses to be granted for the manufacture, use, and sale of patented processes. Up until 1969, when the 1923
Act
was amended (S.C. 1968-69, c. 49) to permit compulsory licenses to import patented pharmaceutical products, few applications for compulsory licenses were made. Subsequent to the 1969 amendment, however, 559 licenses to import and sell have been applied for; of these, 306 have been granted, 15 have been refused or terminated, 96 have been abandoned or withdrawn, and 142 were still pending as of January 31, 1985. (See H.C. Eastman,
Report of The Commission of Inquiry on the Pharmaceutical Industry
(1985), 1-2.)
"The 1969 amendment resulted in the licensing of brand name patented products by generic firms which then produced and marketed their own brand or copy of the patented medicine. Compulsory licensing to import medicines resulted in increased competition by generic firms against patent-holding firms. This competition was further encouraged by the provincial policy of generic substitution under their respective pharmacare plans. The result has been the growth of large and profitable Canadian-owned generic pharmaceutical firms, which in turn led to lower prices. Needless to say, this aspect of compulsory licensing permitting a competitor (generic firm) to import and produce a copy of the patent holder's product (brand name) has been the object of intense political lobbying by the patent-holding firms. There was no such thing as patent exclusivity for an invention of medicine. Indeed an applicant could apply for a compulsory license immediately upon the grant of the patent.
"Restoration of patent exclusivity and revocation of compulsory licensing for patented medicine had for some time been the elusive goal of the patent-holding firms. Reacting to the pharmaceutical lobby, the government appointed Dr. H.C. Eastman as Commissioner to inquire into and report upon the then current situation in the pharmaceutical industry in Canada. The Commissioner's report was submitted on February 28, 1985.
"The government's response to the Eastman report was the introduction in Parliament of Bill C-22, entitled
An Act to amend the Patent Act and to provide for certain matters in relation thereto
, 33rd Parl., 2nd Sess. (1986). It was given first reading on November 7, 1986. The Bill, following its usual legislative route including several references to both the House of Commons Legislative Committee and the Special Committee of the Senate, was eventually passed by Parliament and received Royal Assent on November 19, 1987 (See S.C. 1987, c. 41, also R.S.C. 1985, c. 33 (3rd Supp.))
"It is widely acknowledged that s. 14 of Bill C-22 created a new regime of patent exclusivity applicable to medicines. The amending provisions were designed to give back some measure of patent exclusivity to the brand name firms. While compulsory licensing was retained, it carried with it a prohibition from exercising any rights obtained under the compulsory license for periods varying generally from seven to ten years.
"Patents in respect of medicine, as for any other patent, are issued for 17 or 20 year terms. What is exceptional about these patents, however, is the provision for their immediate compulsory licensing. The new regime does not change this unique provision. It merely prohibits a licensee from exercising the rights given under the license for a particular period of time. In other words, a monopoly is created for the patent holder for the period during which the licensee is prohibited from working the patent.
"Under this limited monopoly, it was recognized that the price of new medicines would be introduced and maintained at higher levels than otherwise would be the case with competition under compulsory licensing. The increased financial return to the brand name firm was expected to encourage pharmaceutical research and development in Canada. From the government's standpoint, growth of this industry with enhanced employment opportunities was considered to be a desirable objective. On the other hand, legitimate concerns arose that, from the consumer's standpoint, prices might escalate to unacceptable levels during the exclusivity period. To counteract this mischief, the impugned amending provisions were also linked to a regulatory scheme to be administered by the Board referred to earlier.
"The Board's main regulatory function is to monitor and review prices at which these new patented medicines are being sold. It is charged with the responsibility of requiring new patentees of medicines to provide information and documents with respect to a patented medicine, the selling price of the medicine, and the cost of making and marketing the medicine.
"If the Board concludes that the medicine is being sold at a price it determines to be excessive, it can order remedial action. Moral suasion by threat of public disclosure is one of the options open to the Board or it can take the form of lifting the prohibition against a licensee in respect of the medicine in question and/or in respect of one other patent for medicine held by that firm. The result is loss of the monopoly for that or one additional patent. It may, as an alternative, direct the patent-holding firm to reduce the price of that medicine to such an extent the Board would no longer find excessive. It is further noted that, for the enforcement of its orders, the Board is clothed with the powers of a superior court (see s. 39.23(4) of the amended 1985
Act
). This last measure has generated much argument, particularly the right to enforce its orders through the contempt power. Without deciding if the Board can avail itself of this last remedy, it is my view that, even if it did, it is not determinative of the issue to be decided."