[5]
The Applicant's position is a unique one. He was found by the Refugee Board, in its decision dated December 17, 1996, not to be a convention refugee. This decision appears to have been made on alternative grounds, the first ground was that the Board found no credible or trustworthy evidence that he was from Afghanistan. The alternative ground was that he was a member of KHAD, a group principally directed to a limited, brutal purpose. The Board said at pages 5-6 of its Reasons:
Thus, the panel has no credible or trustworthy evidence to find that the claimant was indeed from Afghanistan. In the alternative, even if the panel believes that the claimant was credible and was from Afghanistan, he admitted at the hearing that he was given KHAD membership when he worked at the Parachute unit in the military where his father was a high ranking official. His office is under the auspices and part of KHAD. As such he might indeed have a fear of persecution should he return to Afghanistan today. However, even though he denied being in cohort with the cruel, infamous activities of torture and repressing activities carried out by the KHAD, which he was aware of, his mere membership in such a group, which has been found to be principally dedicated to "inhuman, cruel" purposes could be enough for exclusion to be applicable to his case. He has been a member of KHAD since 1987 and he joined voluntarily. The claimant never attempted to leave the KHAD throughout its existence. In fact he admitted that his being employed under KHAD was a form of protection under the previous regime. He could have left KHAD but he stayed on for his personal benefit. The panel respectfully followed the Federal Court's decision in Zadeh v. MCI and adopted the case law in previous CRDD T93-04927 and T93-10912 decisions. In Zadeh, the court upheld the decision in CRDD T93-04927 that KHAD was "principally directed to a limited, brutal purpose" and that a person who had minimal participation (a cleaner/receptionist, later promoted to driver and part-time bodyguard who never participated in brutal acts of the organisation) and mere membership in KHAD, having had the knowledge of the KHAD's cruel doing and did not attempt to leave earlier when he had the chance to do so, was found to be excludable under Article 1F(a). Thus the claimant is excluded in accordance with Article 1F(a).