[8]
In October 2000 the Applicant filed another H & C application from within Canada. By the time this application was considered the Applicant and his wife had a child born in Canada. This application was refused in April 2003. Judicial review was undertaken by the Federal Court and in a decision dated August 11, 2004 the review was allowed and the matter sent back for a new determination (2004 F.C. 1099). In that decision Justice O'Keefe of this Court said at paragraphs 60 to 65:
[60] I am satisfied that the H & C Officer did not take into consideration the potential inadmissibility of the applicant when assessing the best interests of the applicant's Canadian-born child. I wish to make it clear that I am not saying that the H & C Officer should have made a ruling on the applicant's inadmissibility or admissibility to Canada as that is not for the H & C Officer to decide. The H & C Officer should have taken into consideration as a factor, however, the applicant's possible inadmissibility to Canada, when assessing the best interests of the child, especially since section 15 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations, S.O.R./2002-227 deems the Board's findings of fact regarding war crimes conclusive on subsequent decisions regarding inadmissibility.
[61] The direction of the Federal Court of Appeal in Hawthorne, supra is that an H & C Officer is obliged to determine "the likely degree of hardship to the child caused by the removal of the parent" and the weigh that against other factors. While I agree that the H & C Officer is not obliged or empowered to make an admissibility determination, her disregard for the reality of IRPA's statutory scheme resulted in a completely artificial assessment of the degree of hardship that would be suffered by the applicant's child. A meaningful assessment of hardship could not ignore the length of parent-child separation, especially given the country conditions in Afghanistan.
[62] The H & C Officer's reasoning also commented that the applicant's wife and his daughter could visit or join him in Afghanistan. The country condition documentation before the H & C Officer, however, spoke to an extremely dangerous situation in that country and in fact, the Canadian government issued a travel advisory stating that Canadians should not travel to Afghanistan. It was, therefore, unreasonable for the H & C Officer to state that the applicant's wife and daughter could visit him in Afghanistan.
[63] If part of the H & C Officer's reasoning for finding insufficient humanitarian and compassionate grounds to grant the applicant an exemption was that his family could visit him in Afghanistan or that they could relocate there, those conclusions must have some basis in the evidence. The H & C Officer, on cross-examination, admitted that Afghanistan would not be a safe place for a child, and I see no explicit consideration of country conditions in her written decision, even though plenty of documentation was before her on this issue.
[64] My reasoning on this issue does not go so far as to impose a general obligation on H & C Officers to analyze country conditions even where risk is not alleged by an applicant, however, where the officer's justification for refusing an application is grounded in the possibility of certain events, those events must not merely be illusory. Where country conditions are as they are in Afghanistan, it is unreasonable for the H & C Officer to base her decision on the ability of a family to reunite there if it is not safe to do so.
[65] I am of the opinion that the H & C Officer's decision was unreasonable as it was not alive, alert and sensitive to the best interests of the applicant's Canadian-born child. I have no way of knowing what the H & C Officer's decision might have been had she considered the fact of a separation to be brought about should the applicant be declared to be inadmissible to Canada.