[24]
The officer in this case at page 6 of the Tribunal Record said:
Having reviewed and taken into consideration all the information and circumstance of this case, I acknowledge that Mr. Malekzai may experience some emotional difficulty in leaving Canada and returning to Afghanistan. I also acknowledge that his wife and child may be face with the some difficulties and readjustments to their lives without having him in Canada.
I have weighed all the evidence in this case and find that the Article 1F(a) exclusion is very serious and strong factor and one that outweighs all other factors in this case
. In the case of Sultan Mohamad Malekzai AKA Khesrow Malekzai, I do not find any grounds that would constitute any unusual, undeserved or disproportionate hardship if he were to return to Afghanistan. (emphasis added)
at page 7:
In reviewing all the factors of the marriage and the establishment of Mr. Malekzai, I have concluded that the marriage appears to be one that was entered into in good faith and they have a genuine and loving relationship. I accept that Ms. Malekzai is responsible for supporting his family and the he provides for all of their needs. I also accept that Mr. Malekzai has a strong relationship with his children and that a separation from his wife and child may result in the entire family making personal adjustments.
Notwithstanding all these points
, Mr. Malekzai was aware of his Immigration situation at the time he married and started a family. He knew that his convention refugee status had been denied and that his appeal of that decision had also been denied and therefore he faced the possibility of being returned to Afghanistan.(emphasis added)
and at page 8:
In reviewing the all the factors surrounding the marriage, I am satisfied that Mr. Malekzai and his spouse are in a loving and genuine relationship. They have known each other since 1997 and were married five months later in January 1998. At the time that Mr. Malekzai made the decision to enter into a relationship and get married he knew that his refugee claim had been denied and the he was under an effective removal order. He assumed the responsibilities of the marriage knowing that a separation from his wife could be possible. He again assumed these same risks from his daughter and his soon to be born second child when he made the decision to start a family in Canada. In his submission counsel presents that the statutory obligation of an H & C officer is to take into consideration the best interest of the child. He states that since the child is four years of age a separation from her father would be a profound detrimental impact to her psychological and emotional well being. He goes on to state that a Canadian citizen has a right to remain in Canada and that the best interest of that child must be assessed from her perspective. Having considered counsel's submission and the best interest of the child, while I am empathetic to the situation that Mr. Malekzai's children face should their father be required to leave Canada,
I am cannot comment on what psychological or emotional factors they may face. This in my opinion can only be determined by a professional member of the medical society
. It is however not a situation that is uncommon to many single parents in Canada. In reviewing the Supreme Court decision in Baker and the best interest of the children, and the current country conditions in Afghanistan, Mrs. Malekzai's statement that she would not risk her safety and that of her children by going to Afghanistan then it goes without saying that the best interest of these children is to remain in Canada with their mother.
In Canada they would have the support of their mother and other family members who could assist in their upbringing and care
. As citizens of Canada they would have all and any benefits that any Canadian citizen would receive. While they are still young their care would be the mother's responsibility, however when they are older and able to make choices
they can determine for themselves what relationship they will have with their father
. In his submission counsel addressed the financial situation of the family and that Mr. Malekzai is the primary contributor to the household and that his family would be unable to pay the mortgage on their home. When the second H & C application was submitted, Mrs. Malekzai provided information in which she stated that she had full time employment from 1994-1998 and graduated from the Toronto School of Business in accounting. She provided a letter from Smartech Limited to confirm that she was in full time employment from 1999-2001. Having considered this information, I am of the opinion that Mrs. Malekzai has work skills in the field of accounting and could seek employment if it was necessary and therefore provided for her children. Other than statements made in the H & C application and counsel's submission there is insufficient evidence to satisfy to suggest that the applicant or the child would suffer undue disproportionate hardship in the event of separation. (emphasis added)