[1]
Joyal, J.
[Translation]: This is an appeal under s. 56 of the
Trademarks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13, of the decision made by the Chairman of the Opposition Board on June 19, 1991 denying the appellant's application to register the trademark "Le Bateau Blanc and design", filed as number 559,146. The appellant contends that the mark is registrable and that it creates no confusion with the trademarks registered by the respondent.
Facts:
[2]
On January 17, 1986 Boutiques Le Bateau Blanc Inc., of which Multiplicant (the appellant) became the assignee in 1989, filed an application to register the trademark "Le Bateau Blanc and design" based on the use of that mark in Canada since as early as 1975 in connection with children's clothing and footwear as well as in connection with bed linens. Boutiques Le Bateau Blanc Inc. is a retail chain selling clothing produced by other firms. The mark in question is requested in association with the appellant's services and wares. The mark for which the appellant is seeking registration is reproduced below:
[see printed version]
[3]
Following the usual publication of the application for registration in the
Trade Marks Journal
, the respondent, a manufacturing company, filed a statement of opposition asserting that the appellant's mark created confusion with the marks previously registered by the respondent. The respondent's marks, which are also associated with clothing and bed linens, are represented as follows:
[see printed version]
[4]
On June 19, 1991, after holding a hearing, the Trade Marks Opposition Board refused the appellant's application for registration. The Board concluded that the trademarks were very similar (1) in appearance and sound, (2) in the ideas suggested by them when they are considered in their entireties and (3) based on a first impression and vague recollection of the respondent's marks.
[5]
In addition, having regard to the nature of the parties' respective wares and services, the Board concluded that the appellant's children's clothing and bed linens were identical to the respondent's wares. It held that there was some overlap between the appellant's services, associated with the operation and exploitation of a retail business selling children's clothing and footwear, and the respondent's clothing which might be sold in this sort of retail point of sale.
[6]
The Board added that despite the respondent's prior knowledge of the appellant's business, the respondent was still entitled to oppose the application for registration: the remedy is available.
[7]
For these reasons, the Board refused to register the appellant's trademark because of the fact that it could cause confusion with the respondent's trademarks. The appellant filed a notice of appeal from that decision which is now before me.
Submissions Of The Appellant:
[8]
The appellant contends that the Board's decision is unfounded in fact and in law, in that the Board wrongly concluded that (1) the trademark for which application was made created confusion with the respondent's trademarks and (2) the respondent was entitled to argue the existence of the confusion despite its acquiescence in the appellant's use of the mark.
[9]
According to the appellant, the mark creates no confusion and is not likely to create confusion with the three trademarks registered by the respondent in 1970. The trademarks may easily be distinguished both by their grammatical composition and by their graphic design.
[10]
The appellant, which was incorporated in 1975, reiterated that it has been using the mark since that date in Canada in connection with the products and services described in the application for registration, in the course of operating boutiques specializing in retail sale for children only. It has carried on its activities publicly in the retail trade since as early as December 1975. It does business at the retail level only, with the buying public, and has no manufacturer or distributor. The appellant's activities are therefore different from the respondent's, as the respondent carries on no retail sales activity in Canada, at least during the relevant periods, and its trademarks relate to general categories of wares not intended exclusively for children.
[11]
The appellant contends that the respondent has never believed that there was a risk of confusion between the trademarks since it has known of the mark that the appellant wishes to register since 1975 and has never prevented it from using it. On the contrary, the respondent encouraged it to continue using the mark by doing business with it, and therefore, by its actions, acquiesced in the use of the mark. Accordingly, it has lost any right to oppose it.
Submissions Of The Respondent:
[12]
According to the respondent, the appellant is not the person entitled to the registration for which application was made, since on the date the application was filed the mark created confusion with its three previously registered trademarks. The appellant's mark is not distinctive and is not likely to distinguish the appellant's services from the respondent's products. The Board therefore did not err in concluding that the appellant's trademark created confusion, within the meaning of s. 2 of the
Act
, with the respondent's marks.
[13]
In addition, the respondent contends that the Board correctly held that the question of the distribution circuits that would be used by the parties, and the respondent's right to oppose the application despite the appellant's argument that the respondent had allegedly acquiesced in the use of its mark, were irrelevant.
Analysis:
[14]
As a preliminary matter, I would like to confirm that the Board did not err in concluding that the respondent was still entitled to oppose the application or registration, despite its prior acquiescence in the use of the appellant's mark. The respondent may have acquiesced in the use of an expression or a design but not necessarily in the appellant obtaining a trademark similar to its own. The respondent's right to oppose the application for registration is a remedy which cannot be taken away from it.
[15]
A notice of appeal such as in this case is referred to as a trial "de novo". Despite some reluctance on the part of the courts to interfere in the decisions of a specialized tribunal such as the Board, the court may hear any new evidence and exercise the full discretion conferred on the Board, and may therefore reverse any decision made by the Board. This power is conferred on the court under s. 56(5) of the
Act
.
[16]
The issue in this case is therefore whether the appellant's trademark is a registrable mark. The principle on which the Board relied in refusing the appellant's application is the principle of "confusion". Section 12(1)(d) of the
Act
provides that a trademark is not registrable if it creates confusion with a previously registered mark. According to the decision in
Park Avenue Furniture Corp. v. Wickes/Simmons Bedding
(1991), 130 N.R. 223; 37 C.P.R.(3d) 413 (F.C.A.) at pages 422-424, the confusion is assessed as of the date of the decision allowing or refusing registration. Accordingly, in the case at bar, that date is June 19, 1991, the date when the Board refused the appellant's application.
[17]
Confusion between trademarks is assessed on the basis of the confusion that a reasonable person with an imperfect recollection of a mark would experience. Section 6(2) of the
Act
states:
"6(2) The use of a trademark causes confusion with another trademark if the use of the trademarks in the same area would be likely to lead to the inference that the wares or services associated with those trademarks are manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by the same person, whether or not the wares or services are of the same general class."
[18]
The court must assess all of the circumstances surrounding the application for registration of a trademark. This principle derives from s. 6(5) of the
Act
:
"6(5) In determining whether trademarks or tradenames are confusing, the court or the Registrar, as the case may be, shall have regard to all the surrounding circumstances including
(a) the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks or tradenames and the extent to which they have become known;
(b) the length of time the trademarks or tradenames have been in use;
(c) the nature of the wares, services or business;
(d) the nature of the trade; and
(e) the degree of resemblance between the trademarks or tradenames in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them."
[19]
The court acknowledges that in this case the trademarks are inherently distinctive. This was recognized by the Board and is not contested by the parties. The Board stated, at p. 6 of its decision:
[Translation] "The trademarks of the applicant and the opponent, when considered in their entirety, are inherently distinctive in relation to the parties' respective wares or services. The fact that the word 'bateau' has a well-known meaning has nothing to do with the inherently distinctiveness of the parties' trademarks, having regard to the fact that the word 'bateau' and the representation of a sailboat does not relate to the nature of the parties' wares or services."
[20]
The length of time the trademarks have been in use is a determining factor in the case at bar. This was also the case in
Smiles 'N Chuckles Ltd. v. Amend (Fred W.) Co.
(1967), 53 C.P.R. 283 (T.M. Opp. Bd.) and
Pastene Co. v. Lykes Pasco Packing Co.
(1974), 15 C.P.R.(2d) (T.M. Opp. Bd.), cited by the appellant.
[21]
The respondent's trademarks have been used since 1966, and the appellant's since 1975. Over the course of some fifteen years, to each other's knowledge, the parties have used their respective trademarks. There does not seem to have been any animosity between the parties during that time. This situation is particularly important because for several years "Le Bateau Blanc Inc." was the retailer for the respondent's products, thereby, creating a cordial business relationship between the parties.
[22]
With respect to the nature of the service associated with these marks, the appellant's application for registration and the respondent's registrations contain no restriction relating to the parties' respective distribution circuits. We therefore cannot simply look to those currently used by the appellant and the respondent. We must consider the possibility of normal expansion and distribution for this type of wares:
Mr. Submarine Ltd. v. Amandista Investments Ltd.
(1987), 81 N.R. 257; 19 C.P.R.(3d) 3 (F.C.A.) at p. 12.
[23]
It would seem that all the marks in issue are widely known in Canada. Used in association with similar products, they have coexisted for several years. To all appearances, the long-term use of similar marks, side by side, reduces the probability that confusion will "likely" occur, to use the test in s. 6(2) of the
Act
.
[24]
Use was a dertermining factor in
White Cross Surgical Instruments Ltd. v. American White Cross Laboratories Inc.
(1979), 58 C.P.R. (2d) 251 (T.M. Opp. Bd.). In that case, the registration of "White Cross & design" was opposed since that mark created confusion with the previously registered mark "White Cross & design" which included a drawing of a cross somewhat similar to the applicant's. In refusing the opposition, Mr. G. Metcalfe, Chairman of the Opposition Board, stated:
"Another surrounding circumstance that is of particular significance in this case is the rather lengthy concurrent use these marks have enjoyed in relation to each other. The concurrent use has in fact on the evidence been so very extensive that had it given rise to any confusion at any time the opponent would most certainly have included evidence to that effect." (p. 258)
[25]
In
Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. v. Panavision Inc.
(1992), 53 F.T.R. 228 (T.D.) at 237, I reiterated the fact that concurrent use for a long time was a determining factor:
"It might very well be true that there are similarities between the two competing marks. It might very well be true that there is some overlapping in the leasing functions of the appellant and the leasing operations of the respondent. Similarities and overlapping of the nature of the wares and the natures of the trade, must always be measured or balanced by the other criteria set out in s. 6(5). ... The two competing marks, as well as other similar marks, appear to have been surviving side by side and neither the Registrar nor this court have been provided with any real evidence of actual confusion over the past ten years."
[26]
The fact that use reduces the likelihood of confusion is confirmed by the lack of evidence in the case at bar of any confusion over nearly 20 years. The Board acknowledged this fact at pp. 10-11 of its decision:
[Translation] "The opponent's use of its trademarks in Canada has been such that it could be concluded that the absence of incidental evidence of confusion between the trademark Le Bateau Blanc and Design and the trademarks Petit Bateau and Petit Bateau and Design constitutes a surrounding circumstance that is of particular significance in this opposition. However, it is only one surrounding circumstances in this case."
[27]
The absence of such evidence is an important point to consider. In
Prairie Maid Ltd. v. Christie, Brown & Co.
(1966), 48 C.P.R. 289 (B.C.C.A.) at p. 295, Maclean, J.A., stated:
"I have already referred to the circumstances that no evidence was called to indicate that anybody had been deceived by the get-up of the appellant's package. In dealing with this matter Rinfret, C.J.C., in
Dastous and Rose Canned Food Products v. Mathews-Wells Co. Ltd.
, 12 C.P.R. 1, at pp. 6-7; 10 Fox Pat. C. 1; [1950] S.C.R. 261 said:
'It should be noted at once that there is no evidence of confusion, or deception, by the buying public between the products of the respective parties, and this is very material. On this point it is stated by
Kerly on Trade Marks
, at p. 294:
"Where the marks have been circulating side by side in market where deception is alleged to be probable, the fact that no one appears to have been misled is very material."'"
[28]
I would like to add a few words on the protection conferred on a mark in which the words and design are part of everyday life. It seems that the distinctiveness of a mark is substantially reduced if there are already similar trademarks associated with similar products.
[29]
The affidavits of Alan J. Booth and Danielle Manouvrier establish how frequently the design of a sailboat shape has been registered. It is surprising how many marks that include a sailboat drawing have been registered in association with clothing. It is thus inevitable that a mark that includes a drawing of a sailboat is a mark that does not confer extensive protection in the world of trademarks.
[30]
The respondents' three marks are therefore marks for which there is a limited range of protection. It has been established that:
"... where a party has reached inside the common trade vocabulary for a word mark and seeks to prevent competitors from doing the same thing, the range of protection to be given him would be more limited than in the case of an invented or unique or nondescriptive word ( per Rand, J., in
General Motors Corp. v. Bellows
, [1949] R.C.S. 678 à la p. 691)."
[31]
This same type of approach may be used where the mark also contains a popular design. This was demonstrated in
Hermés Société Anonyme v. Fletcher Golf Enterprises Ltd.
(1982), 72 C.P.R.(2d) 71 (T.M. Opp. Bd.), affirmed at (1984), 78 C.P.R.(2d) 134 (F.C.T.D.), in which Mr. Partington of the Opposition Board concluded, at pp. 81-82:
"Apart from the state of the register evidence confirming the existence of registrations for horse and carriage designs in the clothing area, the applicant's evidence further confirms use of these trademarks in association with clothing in the market place by way of the Gates Benison and Gardner affidavits. (...) Having regard to this evidence, I would conclude that the design of a horse and carriage as a trademark would not be entitled to a broad ambit of protection as applied to clothing or, in the case of a mark including such a design, would add little inherent distinctiveness to the trademark."
[32]
This means that a mark of a "sailboat" could not be given an unlimited range of protection and the holder thereby given a monopoly.
[33]
The cases have long recognized that a judgment dealing with the likelihood of confusion between two trademarks must take into account the "surrounding circumstances". The cases add that the factors referred to in paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of subs. (5) of s. 6 of the
Act
are not exhaustive and the weight that must be given to each of them may vary from one case to another.
[34]
That means that in conducting an examination of the likelihood of confusion between two trademarks we must avoid turning it into a mathematical process. This was the opinion I expressed in
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED, subsequently affirmed on appeal at (1993), 155 N.R. 159; 49 C.P.R.(3d) 217 (F.C.A.).
[35]
To summarize, while a court must take into account the surrounding circumstances in determining the likelihood of confusion, it is of singular importance that over several years of use, to the knowledge of the parties to the dispute and to the knowledge of their numerous customers, it has not been possible to produce any evidence of actual confusion.
[36]
As a result, and with all the respect due to the learned Chairman of the Opposition Board, I must allow the appeal and order the registration of the mark "Le Bateau Blanc".
[37]
The appellant is entitled to its expenses.
Appeal allowed.
Editor: Janette Blue/slm
