[4]
A few passages from the amended statement of claim will illustrate its condition more aptly than attempted description or commentary.
"1.A. Plaintiff (PF.) is Indian, descendant of Simgeget (Royalty) and is father and grandfather of Sigidim Uanaak (Royalty in female line) of the Almerican Nation, 1B to 1L (Page 2A).
"2.A. PF resides at Gitanmaax, ancestral village of Gitxsan, one of the Almerican Indian Tribes, within the meaning and intention of Canada's
Constitution
(1492 to the present), 2B to 2E(b) (Page 2B)
"3.A. Pf is the true and rightful Heir of God's Crown, Messiah, God's Agent, owner of the radical root title in all the country of Canada (and in the World), and is the private Equity Holder of all the Crown's Lands and Properties including lands designated as Indian Reserve Lands and to include lands that may be set aside for Indians in future under Treaty or any such provisions; 3B to 3H (Page 2C)
"4.A. Defendant is subject to the Supremacy of God and cannot abrogate, derogate, or in any way diminish Pf's rights as Indian and as the true Crown 4B to 4C (Page 2C)
"5.A. Defendants presence in Canada without Pf's leave or consent constitutes Trespass and causes injury to all Indians and impedes completion of God's Kingdom 5B to 5G (Page 2D)
"6.A. Pf is son of Alma Jean Russell Sterritt (1917-1967) wife of Wiigak, mother-in-law of Delgamuukw, descendant of the Lt. General Wm. Goffe, born Newfoundland 6B to 6F (Page 2E)
. . . . .
"8.A. Defendant (Df) is Her Majesty, Elizabeth II, Queen, as represented in Canada and her Heir and Beneficiaries (Pf is Successor of Df) 8B (Page 2F)
"1.B. Plaintiff herein is plaintiff in Supreme Court of British Columbia Action #9990 [Prince Rupert Registry] wherein the defendant herein has filed defense to claims interactive with this Action
. . . . .
D. That Action may not encompass Federal Lands however reserved
E. This Action is comprehensive of Canada entirely
F. Pf's personal and sole corporate Right is subordinate only to the Right of Jesus Christ and God
. . . . .
L. Pf's Indian Right prevails over non-indian rights
"2.B. Plaintiff has moved [Action #9990, SCBC, P.R. Reg.] for Permanent Orders creating the Principality Of Gitanmaax at the Canyons and Junctions of the Skeena and the Hagwilget [Simpson's or Bulkley] Rivers by concession
. . . . .
"4.A. (Page 2)
"B. Pf is Beneficiary of the Supremacy of God [herein the bottom horizontal of the "D" ends on the left with an arrow-head, also].
"C. Pf is entitled to advance and increase and improve our Existing Right and the rights of all Indians and the right of the members of our Kingdom of God.
. . . . .
"F. Pf's equity in Canada is equal to the sum of the Indian Lands and the Crown Lands and includes Title as Prince in the Principality of Gitanmaax and includes Title as King, the Owner of the entire Province of British Columbia and involves Root Title underlying all Fee Simple Tenure."
. . . . .