[24]
The other two cases cited by WCC do not provide the needed basis for its argument either.
Melnor Manufacturing
, supra, dealt with the
Industrial Design Act
and
Union Label Act
, R.S.C. 1952, c. 150 and is not relevant to this discussion. While the applicant argues that
Marchands Ro-Na
, supra, is a case of innocent misstatement, I would interpret it as a case where an intent to deceive was present. The relevant facts and analysis of Addy, J., in
Marchands Ro-Na
can be found on pages 29-30:
"The first mark was applied for by T-Fal Corporation of New York in 1961 on the basis of a proposed use of the mark in Canada. As previously stated, since 1958 the wares duly marked T-Fal had, at all relevant times, been shipped by the French manufacturer directly to Canada and were picked up there by the Canadian distributors.
When requested to furnish proof of actual use following application in 1963 on the basis of proposed use, a rather craftily worded and ambiguous affidavit was furnished by the president of T-Fal Corporation of New York
. The relevant paragraph reads as follows: '... that use of the trade mark identified in the above trade mark application has been commenced in Canada in respect of all of the wares identified in the said application'. Although not untruthful, the statement does not reveal that in fact and to the full knowledge of the deponent, the mark had been used continuously in Canada for three years previous to the application submitted on the basis of proposed future use, nor does the affidavit reveal that it was not T-Fal Corporation of New York but Tefal S.A. of France which had been using it and was continuing to use it.
It is now clear from the evidence that the U.S. distributor never at any time used nor intended to use the mark in Canada and it must, therefore, be struck from the register
.
"The respondent argued that the first mark should be maintained because since then, in December, 1968, the mark had been absolutely assigned to the French company, which in fact had been using it. The subsequent assignment cannot cure the defect since the assignor had nothing to assign. T-Fal Corporation of New York was not the owner of a valid mark and had no title whatsoever to the T-FAL mark in Canada.
The registration was void ab initio: it was obtained on misleading evidence and the true facts establish a complete absence of right in the assignor to any mark: nemo dat quod non habet
." (Emphasis added)