[48]
The expert evidence from the respondent with respect to functionality was from Mr. Paul Arato, an industrial designer. He did not disagree with, or contradict Mr. Lake's evidence that every element of the sloped bin refuse container distinguishing guise trademark was functional. Mr Arato deposed at paragraph 7 of his affidavit:
"In my view this allegation is not pertinent to the distinctiveness of the guise shape. There is no question, in my view, that the Haul-All product exhibits good engineering design and is fully operational, and functional for its purpose. Other structural shapes could equally fill those functions. The existence of the Haul-All distinguishing guise does not appropriate any utilitarian aspect of waste containers. It simply adopts a unique selection of shapes and orientations while leaving a full spectrum of design options available to any entity wishing to embark in design and manufacture [of] containers. Specifically, many containers exist which have sloping surfaces of diverse shapes and configurations. Most containers, from a functional aspect, have entry and exit openings, simply by virtue of their purpose and use. However, none of the features mentioned by Mr. Lake are unique to [the] Haul-All container, and remain available to designers of other containers."
and at paragraph 8:
"From my personal experience, there are many containers, both in the past and in the future which will continue to have sloped surfaces which will prevent pooling of water. There are numerous configurations in which one can design sloped surfaces for waste containers and for other outdoor containers. The same may be said of preventing seating for bears and raccoons. In fact, I too have designed refuse containers, as well as outdoor newspaper dispensing containers, which have a sloped surface designed to prevent seating by animals and people. Furthermore, any aperture closure or door on any container, which must be raised for opening must of necessity be assisted by gravity when it is closed. This is seen every day in your ordinary household garbage can. The Haul-All design does not appropriate this concept nor exclude this element from any future container design."