[61]
Neither the
Trade-marks Act
nor the
Industrial Design Act
contain a statutory provision that prohibits the scenario outlined by Mr. Zimmerman. This can be contrasted with section 64 of the
Copyright Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-42 as amended, which removes articles with a utilitarian function from the scope of copyright protection and thereby prevents overlapping protection with the
Industrial Design Act
. The solution proposed by Mr. Zimmerman is to derive a statutory basis from paragraph 13(1)(b) by finding that it is unreasonable to extend the industrial design monopoly by means of a distinguishing guise. WCC also claims this prohibition can be founded in paragraph 18(1)(b). It argues that after the term of an industrial design registration expires, the design becomes dedicated to the public and cannot be considered distinctive, the design being neither "adopted to distinguish" nor "actually distinguishing" the holder's wares from those of others. In support of this proposition, WCC has submitted an affidavit dated November 15, 2001 from Mr. David J. French, a Canadian intellectual property lawyer, in which he deposed at paragraph 35:
"Mere sale of products on an exclusive basis during the monopoly period afforded by an industrial design registration would not necessarily be indicative of the use of a distinguishing guise as a trademark as much as it would be indicative of the advantage afforded by the industrial design monopoly. Indeed, it could be that exclusive use established during a period of monopoly would not meet the 'distinctiveness' requirement as envisioned by the trademark legislation since upon expiration of the industrial design right the design is dedicated to the public. As well, the use of a design pursuant to a statutory monopoly would be use by the applicant
as a trademark
, but rather as an aesthetic design that appeals to and is judged solely by the eye, as required by the definition of a design under section 2 of the
Industrial Design Act
." (Emphasis in original)
This deposition is not evidence, but argument.