[6]
In Khalife v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) [see footnote 1], my colleague Justice Mosley dealt with the issue of extension of time to file in paragraphs 12 to 16 of his reasons. He wrote:
But whether the applicant was aware of the decision and made a timely decision to seek judicial review was now moot, counsel argued, as a judge of this Court had granted leave for the application for judicial review to be heard. While the order granting leave is silent on the question of delay, the applicant submits that the court hearing the application should assume that the judge who granted leave also granted an extension of time for the application to be filed, pursuant to paragraph 72(2)© of the Act, as that is what is required by the rules.
Subsection 6(2)…of the Federal Court Immigration and Refugee Protection Rules…(The Rules) provides that a request for an extension of time shall be determined at the same time, and on the same materials, as the application for leave. Moreover, the applicant submits, the respondent's memorandum of fact and law submitted in response to the leave application, had expressly objected to the late filing. The judge granting leave must be presumed to have directed his or her mind to that objection and decided not to accept it, or so it is argued.
While this argument is inventive, I cannot agree that the question is moot in this case. Subsection 6(1)…of the Rules requires that a request for an extension of time shall be made in the application for leave in accordance with Form IR-1 set out in the Schedule…to the Rules. No such request was made by the applicant in his application for leave. In my view, even if leave has been granted,
delay in bringing the application remains a live issue to be dealt with by the judge hearing the matter and may be dispositive of the application
. There will be circumstances in which a decision as to whether an extension should be granted can only be determined at a hearing. The limited amount of time available to a judge considering whether to grant or deny leave does not permit a thorough examination of the reasons why an extension may be justified. I am not prepared to conclude that silence on the matter in the leave order should be taken as acquiescence to an extension, particularly where the applicant has not made the request in his application.
In any event, the Court retains the discretion throughout the consideration of an application to grant an extension of time where it deems it necessary in order to do justice between the parties:… .
In the particular circumstances of this case, I do not consider that it would do justice to the application to dispose of it without consideration of the merits. Accordingly, I will grant the extension the applicant should have requested and treat the application as having been made within the time limit. [citations omitted, emphasis added]