[11]
Counsel for the applicants first learned that the CRDD intended to rely on the transcript of the principal applicant's testi­mony at the first hearing before the CRDD during the pre-hearing conference that im­mediately preceded the second hearing before the CRDD. The following exchange is recorded in the early pages of the transcript of the hearing:
"Presiding member: Okay. Now, counsel, also, during the pre-hearing conference you indicated you had.... you wanted to object to the entering of the transcript of the previous hearing... or had some comments regarding that.
Counsel: Well, yes. Since it's a hearing
de novo
, it would be... I would take objection to the transcript going in. Certainly I have not reviewed it with the claimant in terms of ... for the purposes of any cross-exami­nation or anything along that line. It's my view, with a hearing
de novo
we don't go back into the old hearing with that evi­dence. So I would take formal objection to the entry of that.
Presiding member: Mr. Johnston?
RCO [Refugee Claims Officer]: Well, it's been a common practice here for a long time to enter the documents, and since they have been sworn evidence. A
de novo
hearing means a review. It also means doing it over again because of some prob­lem in the past. As long as we don't repeat that problem from the past, I see no ob­jection to entering the record. And the problem as noted was one of... more of an interpretation or lack of direction, that is, toward the... a confusion between the Lebanese Forces and the Ph[a]lange party was the major problem. But...
. . . . .
RCO: It's [the second hearing] not a review. The review has already been done [by the Federal Court] when it had to be retried. But '
de novo
' means that we can use some of the evidence from the previ­ous hearing, if required. We can use it for corroboration or we can use it for... to speed the hearing up, if every... if the other parties agree that, you know, we accept it as it is, and this is the evidence we need to... so it can be used in many ways. But I think the usefulness is cor­roboration. Some time has gone by. Per­haps some elements of the story may have to be revisited. If there are... you know... major discrepancies. But the general account, I think, and the general practice we've had is to use it sparingly. Even though it's usually put on the record it's not referred to dramatically. It's gen­erally... And in this case I think counsel's objection is more a matter of form than reality, and...
Counsel: I wouldn't put it that way, quite honestly.
Presiding member: Counsel, do you want ... I'll give you the last word before we...
Counsel: As indicated, it's my view that when a hearing is sent back from the Federal Court on the basis of a
de novo
hearing, that is exactly what it should be, a
de novo
hearing. The client is here to give her evidence. What... my concern is, in reality... it's not a superficial... it's not just an objection for the sake of objecting. It's that I fear that it is possible that if she... if that is entered as an exhibit and somehow she's cross-examined on previous testimony, that it would be unfair to her.
I am aware that the board does at times put in the transcript despite objections
. My concern is that she not be cross-examined on it since I have not reviewed that transcript with her because... in my view that is not what we're here for.
Presiding member: Okay. Maybe I'll ask Mr. Johnston, then. Do you plan to go over that...
RCO: I don't plan to go over it in any depth, but I may refer to it in some cross-examination... or cross-questioning regard­ing credibility if some major... I mean, if a minor date is missing or something like that, I'm not concerned about that. I'm just concerned about the broad outlines. And if... for example, if the claimant kept on referring to her husband as a member of a different party than was indicated in the...
. . . . .
Counsel: Just one last thing in terms of... as indicated, I'm aware that sometimes, depending on board members... sometimes the transcript goes in, sometimes it doesn't. Just to say
I wasn't advised by anybody that in this particular case it would be sought to be entered
.
I anticipated that it might be sought to be entered
, I'll be honest with you, but if there is going to be any particular cross-examination on any particular aspect of it, I would at least ask that we be notified in advance so I can review that page or two with the claimant. So that's my...
Mr. Cooke: How can you ask the RCO to notify you in advance when he hasn't heard your client's evidence yet, though?
Counsel: Well, if...
every document that he intended to rely upon was sent to me. If there was going to be reliance on the transcript in full, I mean, I suppose it could have been put in a letter to me. If there were particular aspects of it, then that could have been as well sent to me.
What I'm saying is if...
it's just an issue of fairness
, in my view, that if Mr. Johnston or the board wishes to cross-examine based on previous sworn testimony in the transcript on a certain area, give me a few minutes with my client to refresh her memory [of] what she said. It's been three years since she said it. That's all.
[Following a break]
Presiding member: We're back on the record, same parties present. Counsel, the panel has looked into your request and we will be entering these transcripts,
since they had been sent
, and the practice has been always to make use of these transcripts
for the sake of expediency and speeding up the process
. From our perspec­tive at this moment,
we really do not want to rehash all the testimony which was in the transcript
. If, during these proceedings, a certain area becomes required to delve into further, we will grant you that little pause to review those specific pages with your clients." [see footnote 2] (emphasis added)