[7]
Before proceeding with a review of the demand for particulars as it relates to the specific paragraphs at issue, it should be kept in mind that the application before me deals with particulars required for the purpose of pleading as opposed to particulars for trial. The particulars required for pleading are not nearly as broad as they are for trial and a defendant should not use particulars to find out the scope of the evidence that is going to be led at trial. The jurisprudence is clear that a distinction is to be made between a request for particulars for defence and particulars for trial. In this regard, I note the comments of Marceau, J., in
Embee Electronic Agencies Ltd. v. Agence Sherwood Agencies Inc.
(1979), 43 C.P.R.(2d) 285 (F.C.T.D.) at pp. 286 and 287:
"... However, I wish to point out that, as I understand the law in this regard, a distinction must be made between a request for particulars made prior to the filing of the statement of defence and one made at a later stage of proceedings. Before trial, after the issues have been defined, a defendant is entitled to be informed of any and every particular which will enable him to properly prepare his case, so that he may not be taken by surprise at trial.
But, before the filing of the defence, the right of the defendant to be furnished particulars is not so broad, since it does not have the same basis and serves a different purpose.
A defendant should not be allowed to use a request for particulars as a means to pry into the brief of his opponent with a view to finding out about the scope of the evidence that might be produced against him at trial, nor should he be allowed to use such a request as a means to go on a sort of fishing expedition in order to discover some grounds of defence still unknown to him.
At that early stage, a defendant is entitled to be furnished all particulars which will enable him to better understand the position of the plaintiff, see the basis of the case made against him and appreciate the facts on which it is founded so that he may reply intelligently to the statement of claim and state properly the grounds of defence on which he himself relies, but he is not entitled to go any further and require more than that.
" (emphasis added)