[11]
The Tribunal concluded its Reasons for Decision on the substance of the complaint in the following terms [see footnote 2]:
"[86] Nothing in these reasons should lead to the interpretation posed by counsel for the Respondent [the Union]. This case is not about imposing a standard that persons, male or female, enjoying the protection of a union can be forced to accept sleeping accommodations with members of the opposite sex as a condition of employment. This case rather is about whether in the given circumstances, a discriminatory standard can be justified. At issue too is the conduct of the Union in the face of its obligation to stand up for the Complainant [Ms. Oster]. In my view, the Respondent has not advanced persuasive evidence that the so-called standard was adopted for a purpose or goal rationally connected to the function being performed nor was the standard adopted in good faith in the belief that it was necessary for the fulfilment of the purpose or goal. Moreover, there is no evidence that supports the conclusion that it was impossible to accommodate the Complainant without imposing undue hardship. There is no evidence that allowing a woman to participate in the six-hour opposite shift would interfere with the rights of other employees in adopting accommodating measures. Not even a negligible effort was made by the Respondent to challenge the proposition put to Mr. Crain by Mr. Robertson [the representative of Norsk Pacific to whom Mr. Crain spoke by telephone on the day in question] concerning the unsuitability of the Complainant in relation to the posted position.
"[87] The Respondent argues in an effort to absolve itself of responsibility for what occurred on March 8th in Mr. Crain's office, that there was no obligation to respond to the position taken by Mr. Robertson on behalf of Norsk because there was not a woman who would have been referred that day. The Complainant did not seek the position nor did she possess the experience to qualify. The Respondent, it is said, deals with problems of this nature as they arise and are dealt with in the course of bargaining leading to a collective agreement. So, failure to dispatch in these circumstances was not discrimination and did not taint the dispatch. There was no obligation to respond to what Mr. Robertson said and, as put by counsel for the Respondent, it is not the Respondent's responsibility to be the employer's human rights watchdog.
"[88] I disagree. The Respondent had an obligation both at law and under the collective agreement not to be a party to a discriminatory act. It had a duty to respond in a way that was consistent with its obligations to accommodate the Complainant. Arguably, this could have been accomplished in a number of ways. First, by not participating in the tenor of the discussion between Mr. Crain and Mr. Robertson in a way that it appears to have given sanction to what was said. Mr. Crain could have objected or challenged the proposition put to him and signalled his intent that the Complainant should proceed to apply through the hiring hall process. That would have left open the possibility that the procedures called for in the collective agreement ... would have been exercised, even though Ms. Oster was not destined ultimately to be selected. This was not done.
"[89] I refer again to the evidence of the President of the Union ... who stated that in the event of a complaint by Ms. Oster, the Union could have phoned Norsk and advised them of the possible implications if they refused this woman a job. Instead of doing that, the Union acquiesced in the inadmissible reason for the denial of the dispatch. I am also influenced in coming to this conclusion by the Union's apparent disregard of [an article] of the collective agreement which prohibits discrimination against any person (as I read it) on the basis of sex. [The article in question], somewhat ironically, is juxtaposed with [another article] which states that the manning of a tug shall allow for 'two (2) men'.
"[90] In
Renaud
, Sopinka, J., said that minor interference or inconvenience is the price to be paid 'for religious freedom in a multi cultural society'. This sentiment might be paraphrased in the context of this case to say that such interference and inconvenience is the price to be paid for according equality rights to women. This is so especially where the accommodation was available to the Respondent in a relatively simple and straightforward way.
"[91] The Respondent has failed to satisfy the onus to provide reasonable justification for the standard."
(references to specific articles of the collective agreement and to the name of a Union official omitted.)