[16]
In the
Mossop
decision, Chief Justice Lamer wrote at pages 584-585:
"The courts have also been willing to show deference to administrative tribunals for reasons of relative expertise. This is in addition to the normal deference of reviewing courts in respect of questions of fact. But the position of a human rights tribunal is not analogous to a labour board (and similar highly specialized bodies) to which, even absent a privative clause, the courts will give a considerable measure of deference on questions of law falling within the area of expertise of these bodies because of the role and functions accorded to them by their constituent
Act
in the operation of the legislation. The Human Rights Commission undoubtedly serves many useful functions that help to educate, inform, and advise the government, the public and the courts on matters of human rights ... It also provides a procedure for initiating, investigating, and seeking voluntary settlement of human rights complaints. But it must be noted that in none of these roles is the work of the Commission binding on all parties. That power resides only with the tribunal in its adjudicative role under Part III of the
Act
. And the tribunal is not, simply by these other functions of the Commission, entitled to be free of normal review in its adjudicative function. The tribunals themselves are ad hoc bodies established to settle a particular dispute. In this respect their positions are similar to that of a labour arbitrator. But a human rights tribunal does not appear to me to call for the same level of deference as a labour arbitrator. A labour arbitrator operates, under legislation, in a narrowly restricted field, and is selected by the parties to arbitrate a difference between them under a collective agreement the parties have voluntarily entered. As well, the arbitrator's jurisdiction under the statute extends to the determination of whether a matter is arbitrable. This is entirely different from the situation of a human rights tribunal, whose decision is imposed on the parties and has direct influence on society at large in relation to basic social values.
The superior expertise of a human rights tribunal relates to fact-finding and adjudication in a human rights context. It does not extend to general questions of law such as the one at issue in this case. These are ultimately matters within the province of the judiciary, and involve concepts of statutory interpretation and general legal reasoning which the courts must be supposed competent to perform. The courts cannot abdicate this duty to the tribunal. They must, therefore, review the tribunal's decisions on questions of this kind on the basis of correctness, not on a standard of reasonability
." (citations omitted, emphasis added)