[27]
According to the first McDonald affidavit, the CAE Feeder works as follows (see sectional diagram marked "A" on Exhibit "E" of the affidavit):
1. Nominal eight foot logs are delivered to the CAE feeder on the log charging deck. The logs travel along the deck and are delivered individually into the log loading pocket in the CAE Feeder. At the end of the log loading pocket, closest to the flaker, is the slide gate. Initially in the log loading pocket, a narrow compartment, approximately 24 inches wide, is created by triangular shaped wedges. As the logs fill the slot, the wedges retract until the entire log loading pocket is filled. The use of these triangular shaped wedges to decrease and then gradually increase the width of the log loading pocket cause the logs in the bundle to be substantially parallel to one another. The slide gate and pusher No. 1 limit the location of the ends of the logs thereby causing the logs in the pile to be substantially even-ended. After the triangular shaped wedges have been fully retracted the log loading pocket itself is substantially the shape and size of the opening of the flaking compartment. Accordingly, the bundle created in the log loading pocket in the CAE Feeder is a proper bundle.
2. After a proper bundle is created in the log loading pocket of the CAE Feeder the slide gate is opened and pusher No. 1, pushes the proper bundle out of the log loading pocket and pushes the first portion of the proper bundle into the flaking compartment.
3. After pusher No. 1 has pushed the first portion of the proper bundle into the flaking compartment of the CAE Feeder, the side press gate and the log clamps are engaged to hold the proper bundle. The flaking process then commences in the flaking compartment.
4. During the flaking process in the flaking compartment, pusher No. 1 of the CAE Feeder retracts to its original position, the slide gate closes, the log loading pocket is narrowed by the extension of the triangular shaped wedges and individual logs are again delivered into the log loading pocket to create a proper bundle. During the same period of time, after the flaker has completed the flaking process of the first portion of the proper bundle of logs, the side press gate and log clamps on the CAE Feeder release the proper bundle and pusher No. 2 comes down and pushes the next portion of the proper bundle into the flaking compartment.
5. After the flaking process is completed, the side press gate and log clamps on the CAE Feeder are released and pusher No. 2 again pushes the next portion of the proper bundle into the flaking compartment. This sequence is again repeated until all of the proper bundle has been pushed into the flaking compartment.
6. After the last portion of the proper bundle has been pushed into the flaking compartment of the CAE Feeder by pusher No. 2, pusher No. 2 completely retracts. As pusher No. 2 is retracting the side press gate closes and the flaking process begins. After the flaking process of the last portion of the proper bundle is completed, the side press gate retracts. As the side press gate is retracting, the slide gate opens and pusher No. 1 pushes a new proper bundle under a fully retracted pusher No. 2 into the flaking compartment. The entire process is then repeated.