[62]
The plaintiff maintains the term "hopper" as used in the claims of the patent, specifically claim 1, means any kind of temporary storage device, whether located on the top, side, back or front. In other words the plaintiff urged me to adopt a literal interpretation of the term "hopper". The plaintiff further submits that if I do not accept a literal interpretation and interpret "hopper" as meaning an overhead funnel shaped device, the functional equivalent of that "hopper" is still a device which collects the logs, forms them into a compact pile and delivers the pile to the feed compartment. According to the plaintiff, the use of the overhead hopper is merely a preferred embodiment and the essence of the invention or the novel idea of the invention was to create a compact axially aligned pile, to be delivered to the feed compartment while a previous pile was being flaked from the feeding compartment or that while a previous pile was being flaked the next pile was being ready to be delivered when the first pile has been fully flaked. In other words, a bundle or pile was being formed away from the feed trough in order that it could be deposited in the feed compartment when the previous bundle was being flaked. The method of implementing this idea was by means of a hopper, namely a temporary storage compartment. The plaintiff maintains it is immaterial that the defendants do not use an overhead hopper, as they have merely substituted one hopper for another type of hopper. The plaintiff submitted that the method of delivering the bundle to the feeder is a minor change, substitution or a minor variant and accordingly there is infringement. In support of its position, the plaintiff referred me to the following jurisprudence:
AT&T Technologies Inc. v. Mitel Corp.
(1989), 28 F.T.R. 241; 26 C.P.R.(3d) 238 (T.D.);
Catnic Components Ltd. et al. v. Hill & Smith Ltd.
, [1982] R.P.C. 183 (H.L.), and
Cutter (Canada) Ltd. v. Baxter Travenol Laboratories of Canada Ltd.
(1983), 45 N.R. 393; 68 C.P.R.(2d) 179 (F.C.A.).