[95]
The Court of Appeal disagreed with the finding of textual infringement and stated the following at page 197 C.P.R.:
"... Having regard to (a) the dictionary meaning of 'cannula' and the evidence of what it was understood by persons skilled in the art ... to mean, having regard as well to (b) the evidence that at the material time the only mechanism in use in the blood bag field for piercing membrane was a pointed hollow-tube cannula, and to (c) the fact that the only device depicted in the patent drawings as a cannula is a pointed hollow tube, as well as to (d) the absence of evidence that a vaned spike of the kind in the appellant's valve is known in the art as a cannula, I am with respect unable to conclude that the appellant's cruciate vaned spike falls within the meaning of 'cannula' in claims 1, 2, and 4. It is not a tube and, in my view, it is not hollow in the sense that a tube is hollow. Moreover, even if the device could be regarded as within the meaning of 'cannula' in my view it would still fail to satisfy the limitation of claims 1 and 4 to a hollow cannula. I am accordingly of the opinion that claims 1, 2 and 4 are not 'textually' infringed by the appellant's device."
Thurlow, C.J., continued with the following comments at pages 198 and 199 C.P.R.:
"As the result of these conclusions is that the Cutter device falls within the terms of and infringes claim 3, it is not strictly necessary that I deal with the finding of the learned trial judge that the device infringes all four claims by taking their substance. I shall, however, state shortly the view I have formed in case it may be of some interest in the event of an appeal.
"A useful review of the law on this subject is found in the judgment of the former President of the Exchequer Court in
McPhar Engineering Co. of Canada Ltd. v. Sharpe Instruments Ltd. et al.
(1960), 35 C.P.R. 105, 21 Fox Pat. C. 1 [1956-60] Ex.C.R. 467. The subject is also discussed in the more recent case of
Catnic Components Ltd. et al. v. Hill and Smith Ltd.,
[1981] F.S.R. 60.
"It seems to me to be plain that the Cutter spike is, as found by the learned trial judge, the functional equivalent of the cannula referred to in claims 1, 2 and 4. Both are operated by the technician in the same way. Both rupture the membrane and establish a channel or channels through which blood or its components or anticoagulants can flow. Both do it in the same way. The evidence shows that the cannula ruptures the membrane by causing a transverse slit which permits the blood to flow around the outside wall of the cannula as well as through its lumen.
"Moreover, both devices are in the tube and are unattached.
"Further, in my view, the precise structure or configuration of the device to be used to rupture the membrane and establish a flow channel is not an essential element of the invention. As I see it, it would not matter whether a cannula or a vaned spike or a device of some other sort, such as, for example, a device of the like proportions with a semicircular cross section, were used or whether it would cut out in whole or in part or merely rupture the membrane. The substance of the invention, its 'pith and marrow' would be taken so long as the rupturing device has the essential elements of being in the tube and being unattached. I think therefore that the substance of the invention has been taken and that all of the claims of the patent were infringed by the Cutter device."