[96]
In
Catnic
the plaintiff obtained a patent in connection with lintel. The plaintiff had substantial market success. The defendant initially unaware of the patent, copied the device. There was a patent infringement action and the plaintiff was successful. The defendant then sought to design and construct a device with the purpose of avoiding the patent. The basic distinction between the two devices was that the plaintiff's lintel had a back plate which extended vertically while the defendant's device had a back plate which was six degrees from vertical. The issue before the House of Lords was whether this distinction was sufficient to avoid infringement of the patent. Lord Diplock noted that all school boys would know that the distinction between vertical and six percent off vertical would result in a one to two percent reduction in strength and accordingly found from a functional point of view, that the distinction was negligible. Lord Diplock continued with his analysis at pages 242 to 243:
"My Lords, a patent specification is a unilateral statement by the patentee, in words of his own choosing, addressed to those likely to have a practical interest in the subject matter of his invention (i.e., 'skilled in the art'), by which he informs them what he claims to be the essential features of the new product or process for which the letters patent grant him a monopoly. It is those novel features only that he claims to be essential that constitute the so-called 'pith and marrow' of the claim. A patent specification should be given a purposive construction rather than a purely literal one derived from applying to it the kind of meticulous verbal analysis which lawyers are too often tempted by their training to indulge. The question in each case is: whether persons with practical knowledge and experience of the kind of work in which the invention was intended to be used, would understand that strict compliance with a particular descriptive word or phrase appearing in a claim was intended by the patentee to be an essential requirement of the invention so that
any
variant would fall outside the monopoly claimed, even though it could have no material effect upon the way the invention worked.
"
The question, of course does not arise where the variant would in fact have a material effect upon the way the invention worked
. Nor does it arise unless at the date of publication of the specification it would be obvious to the informed reader that this was so. Where it is not obvious, in the light of then-existing knowledge, the reader is entitled to assume that the patentee thought at the time of the specification that he had good reason for limiting his monopoly so strictly and had intended to do so, even though subsequent work by him or others in the field of the invention might show the limitation to have been unnecessary. It is to be answered in the negative only when it would be apparent to any reader skilled in the art that a particular descriptive word or phrase used in a claim cannot have been intended by a patentee, who was also skilled in the art, to exclude minor variants which, to the knowledge of both him and the readers to whom the patent was addressed, could have no material effect upon the way in which the invention worked." (Emphasis added)