[19]
The evidence of Apotex is from its president. He is both the author of its notice of allegation and the deponent of the one affidavit filed by Apotex. For ease of refer­ence, it is useful to repeat the factual and the legal basis asserted by Apotex in support of its allegation of the invalidity of the '334 patent:
"Patent 1,322,334 discloses no invention beyond what is claimed in patent 1,218,067. More particularly, there is nothing further inventive in mixing cipro­floxacin hydrochloride with a pharmaceuti­cally acceptable diluent or carrier to make a composition of the use of such composi­tion."
The portions of the Apotex affidavit which complement its notice of allegation state:
"17. The '334 Patent is titled 1-Cyclopro­pyl-6-Fluoro-1,4-dihydro-4-Oxo-7-Pipera­zino-Quinoline-3-Carboxylic acid - Con­taining Compositions and Uses Thereof.
"18. The '334 Patent is a result of a divi­sion to a parent application related to compounds including the compounds, ciprofloxacin hydrochloride. The '334 Patent at issue in the present proceeding claims pharmaceutical compositions con­taining an effective amount of, among other things, ciprofloxacin hydrochloride, together with pharmaceutically acceptable carriers of various types to form various types of pharmaceutical compositions for use in a specified manner.
"19. The only use for ciprofloxacin hydrochloride is a medicine, that is, com­pounded into a pharmaceutical formulation for use in the treatment of human or ani­mal disease. As such, this use is the utility of the ciprofloxacin hydrochloride con­tained in the parent application. Therefore, the inclusion of claims to compositions of ciprofloxacin hydrochloride and their use in the '334 Patent does not constitute any invention over and above that disclosed in the parent application. Rather, the '334 Patent represents an attempt to double patent the invention contained in the parent application.
"20. Typically, the exercise of standard pharmaceutical formulations art will lead to an appropriate combination of inactive ingredients mixed with one or more active ingredients to create an effective pharma­ceutical composition. The particular combi­nations and choices are well known to pharmaceutical formulators.
"21. Except in the case of a very few hard to formulate active ingredients, of which ciprofloxacin hydrochloride is not one, no inventive ingenuity is ordinarily required to enable a formulator to take an active ingre­dient and include it in a pharmaceutically acceptable dosage form.
"22. The '334 Patent claims compositions of ciprofloxacin hydrochloride. However, the invention disclosed in the '334 Patent does not describe or solve problems of formulating the ciprofloxacin hydro­chloride. It is my experience that cipro­flox­acin hydrochloride is easily for­mulated into dosage forms without the need of a separ­ate invention. As a result, the '334 Patent does not disclose any invention."