[11]
The Act precludes disclosure to various types of information as specifically defined and also authorizes refusal to disclose information in certain other defined cases. In relation to third party information, that is information relating to a party other than the requestor or a government agency, which is not otherwise exempt, the Access to Information Act exempts from disclosure only certain kinds of information as defined in s. 20, the relevant parts of which for purposes of this case are:
"20(1) Subject to this section, the head of a government institution shall refuse to disclose any record requested under this Act that contains
(a) trade secrets of a third party;
(b) financial, commercial, scientific or technical information that is confidential information supplied to a government institution by a third party and is treated consistently in a confidential manner by the third party;
(c) information the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to result in material financial loss or gain to, or could reasonably be expected to prejudice the competitive position of, a third party; or
(d) information the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to interfere with contractual or other negotiations of a third party.
. . . . .
"20(5) The head of a government institution may disclose any record that contains information described in subs. (1) with the consent of the third party to whom the information relates.
"20(6) The head of a government institution may disclose any record requested under this Act, or any part thereof, that contains information described in paragraph (1)(b), (c) or (d) if such disclosure would be in the public interest as it relates to public health, public safety or protection of the environment and, if such public interest in disclosure clearly outweighs in importance any financial loss or gain to, prejudice to the competitive position of or interference with contractual or other negotiations of a third party."
The Act provides for intervention and an opportunity for representations by a third party, not in all cases but in certain cases, as follows. (Section 28, quoted here, is from S.C. 1980-81-82-83, c. 111, Sch. I, in force at the times relevant to this application. In R.S.C. 1985, c. A-1, s. 28(1) to (4) below is s. 27 and s. 28(5) to (8) is s. 28.)
"28(1) Where the head of a government institution intends to disclose any record requested under this Act, or any part thereof, that contains or that the head of the institution has reason to believe might contain
(a) trade secrets of a third party,
(b) information described in paragraph 20(1)(b) that was supplied by a third party, or
(c) information the disclosure of which the head of the institution could reasonably foresee might effect a result described in paragrah 20(1)(c) or (d) in respect of a third party.
the head of the institution shall, subject to subs. (2), if the third party can reasonably be located, within thirty days after the request is received, give written notice to the third party of the request and of the fact that the head of the institution intends to disclose the record or part thereof.
"28(2) Any third party to whom a notice is required to be given under subs. (1) in respect of an intended disclosure may waive the requirement, and where the third party has consented to the disclosure the third party shall be deemed to have waived the requirement.
"28(3) A notice given under subs. (1) shall include
(a) a statement that the head of the government institution giving the notice intends to release a record or a part thereof that might contain material or information described in subs. (1);
(b) a description of the contents of the record or part thereof that, as the case may be, belong to, were supplied by or relate to the third party to whom the notice is given; and
(c) a statement that the third party may, within twenty days after the notice is given, make representations to the head of the government institution that has control of the record as to why the record or part thereof should not be disclosed.
"28(4) The head of a government institution may extend the time limit set out in subs. (1) in respect of a request under this Act where the time limit set out in s. 7 is extended under paragraph 9(1)(a) or (b) in respect of the same request, but any extension under this subsection shall be for a period no longer than the period of the extension under s. 9.
"28(5) Where a notice is given by the head of a government institution under subs. (1) to a third party in respect of a record or a part thereof,
(a) the third party shall, within twenty days after the notice is given, be given the opportunity to make representations to the head of the institution as to why the record or the part thereof should not be disclosed; and
(b) the head of the institution shall, within thirty days after the notice is given, if the third party has been given an opportunity to make representations under paragraph (a), make a decision as to whether or not to disclose the record or the part thereof and give written notice of the decision to the third party.
"28(6) Representations made by a third party under paragraph (5)(a) shall be made in writing unless the head of the government institution concerned waives that requirement, in which case they may be made orally.
"28(7) A notice given under paragraph (5)(b) of a decision to disclose a record requested under this Act or a part thereof shall include
(a) a statement that the third party to whom the notice is given is entitled to request a review of the decision under s. 44 within twenty days after the notice is given; and
(b) a statement that the person who requested access to the record will be given access thereto or to the part thereof unless, within twenty days after the notice is given, a review of the decision is requested under s. 44.
"28(8) Where, pursuant to paragraph (5)(b), the head of a government institution decides to disclose a record requested under this Act or a part thereof, the head of the institution shall give the person who made the request access to the record or the part thereof forthwith on completion of twenty days after a notice is given under that paragraph, unless a review of the decision is requested under section 44."