[44]
As to the third element, the relationship between the parties, the president of the applicant company avers to the special relationship of confidence in communications between the parties here and between the airline industry and the department. He underlines the importance of that relationship in an ongoing situation where the department's inspection staff must rely on industry operators for knowledge and experience in the operation of aircraft and where that staff is limited in its resources to oversee an industry that is expanding and diversifying in an era of deregulation. The special relationship between air industry and inspectors is dealt with in recent study of the Law Reform Commission of Canada, Inspection: A Case Study and Selected References, by John C. Clifford (1988), which generally supports the applicant's view of the current relationship. This Report, based in part on substantial services field study of the air inspection services of the respondent's department, includes the following pertinent passages at page 17:
"The author accompanied airworthiness inspectors during routine inspections of aircraft and conversations with air crew. One inspector constantly stressed the importance of relations with airline staff, and underlined the fact that airworthiness inspectors are mainly interested in getting things corrected. This is accomplished by maintaining a strong network of contacts in the industry, checking with manuals, and generally using every available source of information. The airworthiness inspector ... noted that many problems followed from the use of incomplete reports. Additionally, the airworthiness inspector expressed his difference of opinion respecting enforcement: specifically, he did not think it was always appropriate to follow up with enforcement measures when, for example, 'snags' were reported by AMEs. He outlined their responsibilities, and noted the importance of interpersonal relations and shared backgrounds.
. . . . .
"The airworthiness inspectors indicated that relations with the AMEs were very important because information about maintenance problems was typically passed on in confidence to the airworthiness inspector. As well, remote sources of problems were discussed."
(Note: AMEs, referred to in these passages, are aircraft maintenance engineers, private sector actors, whether employees of private firms or self-employed)