[12]
The
Convention Refugee Determination Division Rules
(SOR/93-45) (the "
Rules
") govern the CRDD's practice and procedure. These
Rules
are made pursuant to the rule-making authority granted to the Chairperson of the Immigration and Refugee Board pursuant to s. 65 of the
Act
. Any rules so made are subject to the approval of the Governor in Council. Rule 19 allows for determinations without hearings:
"19(1) Where a member receives a file pursuant to paragraph 18(3)(b), [see footnote 1] the member, before determining that the person concerned is a Convention refugee without a hearing into the matter, shall verify that
(a) the Minister has not given notice of the Minister's intention to participate at the hearing within the periods referred to in subrule 8(2); and
(b) the information with respect to the claim that is provided by the person concerned is sufficient to enable the member to determine that the person concerned is a Convention refugee, without a hearing into the matter.
"(2) Where, after verification of the matters in subrule (1), a member determines that the person concerned is a Convention refugee, the member shall forthwith render the member's decision and shall send the file to the registrar;
"(3) Where a member decides that the person concerned cannot be determined to be a Convention refugee without a hearing into the matter, the member shall send the file to the registrar so that a date for a hearing may be fixed."
Rules 29 to 31 deal with decisions of the CRDD:
"29. In the event of a split decision on an interlocutory matter, the presiding member shall have the deciding vote.
"30. The registrar shall sign all notices of decisions of the Refugee Division and shall forthwith serve the Minister and the person concerned with a copy of all such notices.
"31. A request made to the Refugee Division pursuant to paragraph 69.1(11)(b) or 69.3(7)(b) of the Act for written reasons for a decision shall be in writing and filed at the registry."
Finally, rule 39 of the
Rules
provides the CRDD with jurisdiction over its own procedures:
"39. These Rules are not exhaustive and, where any matter that is not provided for in these Rules arises in the course of any proceeding, the Refugee Division may take whatever measures are necessary to provide for a full and proper hearing and to dispose of the matter expeditiously."
Discussion
A. Applicant's Position
1. Jurisdiction Of The CRDD