[20]
In the case at bar, it is clear that the 29 May panel had the authority to consider the issue of jurisdiction, pursuant to s. 67(1) of the
Act
. The panel's decision is somewhat confusing: the 29 May panel first concludes:
"We find that the panel on 15 November 1993 made no conclusive decision. It did not reach the conclusion Counsel suggests. It reached no final conclusion on the issue of its jurisdiction. Accordingly, the CRDD is not 'functus officio', and can consider the purported positive decision dated 10 May 1993 [at p. 9 of the CRDD's Reasons; p. 14 of the Applicant's Record]."
The panel then continues:
"If we have erred in our interpretation of the effect of the hearing on 15 November 1993, and the panel did then determine that it had no jurisdiction, it would be necessary to re-open that decision in order to examine the legal effect of the purported positive decision dated 10 May 1993. We turn now to a consideration of the facts upon which that decision was based and our jurisdiction to review it. Because the law in regard to this jurisdiction is technical it is necessary to deal with the factual background prior to deciding whether or not we have jurisdiction to set aside the decision. With these facts in mind we will return to the question of whether or not there is jurisdiction to examine the decision and declare it null and void [at p. 10 of the CRDD's Reasons; p. 14 of the Applicant's Record]."
In the result, the panel finds that, since the applicant was accorded no natural justice in the rendering of the 15 November panel's decision, the proceedings were a nullity. The CRDD states:
"Thus, in the alternative, if we have erred in our decision that the panel of 15 November 1993 did not rule on jurisdiction, we find their ruling fatally flawed by disregard of the statutory requisites for a domestic refugee determination, disregard for the substantial ultimate issue, and procedural ambiguity. For the reasons we have addressed above, in respect of both the substantial ultimate issue and the specific question of the status of the 'Notice of Decision', we find that the proceedings of 15 November 1993 were, if a decision were intended, so defective as to be an absolute nullity [p. 36 of the CRDD's Reasons; p. 41 of the Applicant's Record]."