[8]
The principal judgment in the unanimous
River Rima
case was written by Lord Brandon of Overbrook. It is necessarily cautiously detailed:
"... the appellants (sic) in this case are (sic) Tiphook Container Rental Co. Ltd., whose business is the renting of cargo containers to those who use them, including shipowners. I shall refer to them as Tiphook.
. . . . .
"The agreement dated July 1, 1986 referred to in the endorsement on the writ was entitled 'Lease Plan' and provided for the hiring of cargo containers from Tiphook by NNSL as required by the latter from time to time. It incorporated Tiphook's standard terms and conditions of business. The principal features of the agreement were these. First, containers hired by NNSL from Tiphook were to be collected by NNSL from, and redelivered by them to Tiphook at depots run by Tiphook at various ports and inland cities in numerous countries throughout the world. Secondly, the rent of containers was to be calculated on a daily basis at prescribed rates for different types, beginning on the day of collection and ending on the day of redelivery, and was to be paid monthly. Thirdly, containers were to be supplied by Tiphook at the time of collection in good order and condition, and were to be maintained during hire, and redelivered by the NNSL at the end of hire, in like condition, subject to fair wear and tear. Fourthly, the hire of each container was to be treated as a separate contract.
"There was no term in the agreement relating to the use to which containers hired under it were to be put. In particular, there was no provision that containers so hired or any of them should be used for the carriage of cargo by any of NNSL's ships, specified or unspecified. The procedure followed by NNSL pursuant to the agreement was dealt with in an affidavit sworn by Mr. Abdullah Abubakar, the Liverpool line manager of NNSL, in which he deposed.
'6. The procedure regarding the hire of the containers is as follows. As and when the containers are required, N.N.S.L. contact their leasing agents - all current leasing is now dealt with by Scamar of Paris. The agents then arrange for the containers to be leased and to be delivered to the location where they are required, normally direct to the shippers so that the containers can be stuffed and sometimes to a container terminal. 7. The containers will be carried by an N.N.S.L. vessel if such is available. However, if no N.N.S.L. vessel is available, they will be carried aboard any other vessel which is available with N.N.S.L. being named as the shipper on the bill of lading ... 9. I am informed by Mr. Alegbeleye, the Hamburg line manager of N.N.S.L., that the containers leased to N.N.S.L. have been used by Nigerian Green Line Ltd. ... over the last six months by way of an agreement reached between N.N.S.L. and Nigerian Green Line Ltd. 10. Accordingly, I verily believe that the containers hired by N.N.S.L. are for the use of the company and not by way of supplies to N.N.S.L. vessels, for their operation or otherwise. The containers are for the convenience of the various shippers utilising N.N.S.L. services ...'
"It seems clear from this evidence, and I did not understand Counsel for Tiphook to contend otherwise, that, at the time when NNSL's agents took delivery of any container from the depot run by Tiphook at which it was to be found, Tiphook did not know, from the terms of Scamar's requests or otherwise, on what ship, whether owned by NNSL or some other shipowners, such container, after being stuffed with cargo somewhere on land, would ultimately be carried. As will appear later, I regard this circumstances as of the utmost importance in the decision of this appeal." (pp. 194-195)
"... the first, second and third propositions relied on by Tiphook may well be correct, and I am prepared to assume, without deciding, that they are. The fourth proposition, however, appears to me to present great difficulty. It is clear that par. (m) contemplates a contract of supply, whether by way of sale or hire, between the claimant and a shipowner. But the expression used in par. (m) is 'supplied to a ship' and not 'supplied to a shipowner'. The question is what meaning should be given to the former expression. There are two main kinds of contract pursuant to which goods or materials required for the operation of a ship may reach her. The first kind of contract is one which expressly provides that the goods or materials are required for the use of a particular ship, the identity of which is specified in the contract or will be specified by the time when the contract comes to be performed. The second kind of contract is one which contains no reference to a particular ship for the use of which the goods or materials are required, leaving the shipowner to make his own decision about that later. The first kind of contract is, in my opinion, a contract under which goods or materials are 'supplied to a ship' within the meaning of par. (m). The second kind of contract, however, is, in my opinion, not a contract for goods or materials to be 'supplied to a ship' within the meaning of par. (m). It is no more than a contract for the supply of goods or materials to a shipowner, and as such does not come within par. (m).
"The present case the series of contracts made between Tiphook and NNSL for the hire of individual containers were not contracts of the first kind described above, but contracts of the second kind. It follows that claims in respect of them do not come within par. (m) and are not therefore within the Admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court."