[12]
First the "Nikolay Golovanov" appears on a balance of probabilities to be capable of carrying only containers according to its design description (exhibits A and C
Lloyd's Register
). Secondly, as shown in Mr. Grégoire's exhibit B, the parties have agreed, not as to what constitutes the law, but to compacts and facts which bring them within the law. So, on p. 4 of the agreement that which takes it out of the
River Rima's
sway are clauses under 14. DEFAULT AND REMEDIES (b), thus:
"(b) Upon the occurrence of any Event of Default, and at any time thereafter so long as the same shall be continuing, Lessor may forthwith (but without prejudice to any rights under this Lease), by notice in writing to the Lessee, declare this Lease to be in default and may then exercise any permitted remedy at law or equity, including, without limitation, one or more of the following:
. . . . .
"(d) The remedies and other rights set forth in this Section, elsewhere in this Lease or otherwise available to Lessor, are cumulative and not alternative. Such remedies and rights may be exercised separately or in any combination or sequence, and the use of any remedy or right individually or in any combination or sequence shall be without prejudice to and shall not waiver any others. The exercise of any such remedy or right, including, without limitation, termination, shall not relieve Lessee of any liability or obligation under this Lease incurred prior to the exercise thereof.
. . . . .
"17. Miscellaneous
"(m) The Containers are maritime Containers, are supplied for use on and for the operation of a Vessel or Vessels, and shall be used only in international trade and in connection with contracts for the carriage of goods in ships. The Lessee undertakes that on each occasion it takes delivery of a Container it does so as an authorized agent of, and on behalf of a Vessel or Vessels. The Containers shall not be used for purposes of inland transport, save that they may be transferred from the shippers' premises directly to the port of exportation and from the port of importation directly to the primary destination or the Lessor's appointed depot.
"(n) Lessee shall be obliged, upon request by Lessor, to immediately specify in writing the Vessel(s) to which Lessor's Containers have been or are to be supplied. Lessee agrees that the supply of Containers to the Vessel or Vessels is essential and necessary for the service provided by those Vessels. The parties further agree that this lease is a Maritime Contract. The Lessee recognizes and grants to the Lessor an express maritime lien against the Vessels and their pending freight to secure all obligations running from the Lessee to the Lessor under this Lease. The Lessor may execute its maritime lien on Vessels by appropriate process in any court of any country having general Admiralty and Maritime Jurisdiction."