[4]
In addition, the principal Applicant filed in evidence a report from a psychiatrist in which the principal Applicant's wife gives hearsay, but potentially admissible evidence of the rape she suffered by agents of the state in Peru and also contains an expert opinion that five months before the hearing before the RPD she was suffering from Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder as a result of her reported ordeal. The report states as follows:
In July 2000, while her husband went to find out about the election results at the local union hall, two plain-clothes armed men entered forcibly into her home, pushed her into a bedroom and threw her to the floor. She was told her husband was again in detention and would be killed. She was beaten, her hair was pulled and she was pointed with a gun while the men talked to someone through a radio. She was then fondled and raped by both men. Before they left, they told her that her husband would be killed if she talked to anyone about what happened to her.
[...]
As a result of the extremely traumatic experiences described above, Ms. Ezeta has developed significant physical and emotional sequelae. She lives in constant fear of further persecution and is obsessed with the safety of her children, and reports that taking care of them is her main objective in life.
She has symptoms of anxiety and depression and a very severe sleep disorder. She feels anxious, restless and sad with frequent crying episodes. During the night she becomes very scared and has difficulties falling asleep. When she sleeps, she has terrifying nightmares consisting of persecution and usually wakes up hearing footsteps coming up the stairs, so every night she locks her children bedroom door to protect them.
She is fearful of leaving her home alone and cannot trust people and as a result she is very socially isolated. There is also a feeling of anger and frustration towards her husband whom she blames for the situation that they are in, but she promptly regrets feeling this way and becomes even more sad and anxious.
[...]
She denies feeling suicidal, however she reported that she would rather die than returning to Peru where she feels the entire family could be killed.
(Tribunal Record, p. 381.)
It is arguable that the report provides evidence capable of corroborating the principal Applicant's claim of prospective fear of persecution. That is, the hearsay statements of fact from the principal Applicant's wife respecting the rape can be accepted as true by the RPD under s.182(1) of IRPA. In addition, the psychiatric evaluation provided in the report can be accepted as corroboration of the statements of fact.