[7]
In rendering its decision, the RPD first makes a hotly contested negative credibility finding against the principal Applicant as a result of a focus on discreet features of the principal Applicant's testimony, and then, based on this negative finding, rejects other very cogent documentary evidence tendered by the principal Applicant. The RPD's analysis is as follows:
All those elements make us think that the principal claimant's problems suffered in his country are not credible. We did not believe them. Not having believed the principal claimant's problems, we also do not believe his wife's and children's problems since they base their claims on the same facts alleged by the principal claimant.
Not having believed their problems, we do not give any probative value to the following documents
. First of all, document C-6 is described as a psychiatric report. However, all the findings and conclusions of the psychiatrist are based on a "one-hour session interview". Mrs. Ezeta was not subjected to any test, and there was not other interview than this "one-hour session". The psychiatrist wrote what the claimant told her. The psychiatrist mentions certain symptoms such as "anxiety and depression and a very severe sleep disorder. She feels anxious, restless and sad with frequent crying episodes... She is fearful of leaving her home alone and cannot trust people and as a result she is very socially isolated..." The claimant may suffer from those symptoms, but they are not related to the problems mentioned in her husband's narrative, because we did not believe them. As for the document deposited as exhibit C-8, this document talks about the principal claimants's severe dental problems. Again, we feel sorry for the principal claimant's dental problems, but we do not think they are related to the problems mentioned in the narrative and in his testimony, because we did not believe them. The letter deposited as exhibit C-9 comes from a relative, as the principal claimant mentions in his narrative. It comes from an interested person, and as we did not believe the claimants' problems, we do not give probative value to the exhibit C-9. We already talked about exhibit C-10 earlier in our decision, and we do not give it any probative value.
We do not believe that the principal claimant was the secretary of the "Workers' Union of Peru". We do not give any probative value either to the document deposited as exhibit C-11. This document does not look official either.
As for the document deposited as exhibit C-12, it only demonstrates that this person is dead. However, we cannot make link between this death and the claimants' problems because we did not believe them. [Emphasis added]
(Tribunal Record, p. 10.)