[25]
Applying in a somewhat generic fashion the test suggested by Marceau, J., I should conclude:
1. The facts assumed by the Minister in his direction under s. 247(2) cannot be seriously disproved. These facts all come out in the evidence which I have summarized earlier and on which I made a number of findings.
2. The inferences drawn by the Minister on the facts before him cannot be said to be unwarranted or unreasonable. Notwithstanding the intentions asserted at length by Mr. Schwartz before this court that tax savings were not an issue in setting up Jaans or that any tax advantage to be derived was a matter left to his auditors, it is a warranted, and reasonable inference to draw that it was not solely for the purpose of carrying out the business of the two corporations in the most effective manner.
As I have indicated in my findings, the assertions by Mr. Schwartz, although not totally discounted, have very little in the way of overt and objective fact to support them and the weight to be given to these assertions is considerably attenuated. I might add in this respect that I see nothing particularly effective from a business point of view in MFL paying to Jaans in one year three times the cost of capital equipment originally sold to it. Nor do I find it a particularly attractive business purpose in Jaans paying Mrs. Schwartz a substantial annual salary for co-signing cheques.
3. Among the conclusions which may be drawn from the evidence to which I have referred is that the directing hand in the operation of the two companies was an articulate, astute and talented entrepreneur who picked up a senile enterprise twenty years ago and made of it a remarkable success. In so doing, he adopted good business and management techniques. His professional experience as a chartered accountant lent itself to the numbers-crunching game in which he became involved. His entrepreneurial spirit in turn lent itself to his involvement in a farming enterprise in the Eastern Townships and to real estate development in Moncton.
An analysis of the companies' operations and of their financial statements over the years under review clearly attests to an awareness of any number of tax considerations to which the collective mind of his auditors, if not his own, was applied. I need only give as examples of this that the Trust Deed creating Algoa Trust stipulated its situs as Prince Edward Island, with its consequent tax advantages; that Jaans triggered off a sprinkler effect out of MFL earnings to the benefit of Mrs. Schwartz by way of remuneration and to the benefit of the children by way of dividends to Algoa Trust; that MFL, notwithstanding the strictures imposed by s. 31 of the Income Tax Act, made full use of its farm losses in its returns; finally, as the fact is, that the ownership of Jaans in the hands of Algoa Trust ostensibly put the company beyond the reach of s. 256 of the Income Tax Act.