[35]
The Secretary of State Report notes the murder of the six American citizens in 1973, 1975 and 1976, in Iran, and that members of the Mujahideen were arrested and executed by the Shah's government for some of these murders. It states that the organization supported the take over of the U.S. embassy and opposed the release of the American hostages. The Report notes that the organization "changed sides" in 1979-81 and moved from supporting the Iranian revolution and Khomeini to opposing Khomeini. It describes the group as an organization dedicated to political change that uses armed struggle as part of its tactics. The Report describes the exile of the leaders to Paris, the formation of the National Council of Resistance, at which time the Mujahideen are described as controlling a number of organizations including the Muslim Student Association, the Tawhidi Society of Guilds, the Movement of Muslim Teachers, the Union of Instructors in Universities and Institutions of Higher Learning. It describes a split in the leadership of the group, as the present leaders became more closely associated with Saddam Hussein. It describes the move from France to Iraq in 1986, which it suggests was precipitated by Iran's pressure on the French government. It states, with respect to its activity since 1986, that the organization's military record is limited and that it launched its most significant incursion from Iraq into Iran in June and July 1988, in co-ordination with Iraqi forces. The opening paragraph of the section dealing with the organization's recent activities in Iran states that the author cannot confirm or refute the Mujahideen's claim not to target civilian targets:
"In publications distributed in the West, the Mojahedin claim they do not target civilians in Iran. We are unable to confirm or refute this assertion ..."
The Report then describes radio broadcasts of the "Voice of Mojahed", which are transmitted into Iran from Mujahideen bases in Iraq, claiming responsibility for a number of bombings and attacks.