[15]
A good example of the application of the above-noted principles to the specific issue of identity can be found in the decision of Justice Konrad von Finckenstein in Al-Khaliq v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) [2005] FC 625 where he held at paragraphs 18 to 21 as follows:
[18] The Applicant argues that both these documents were incorrectly rejected without evidence external to the document. He relies on Ramalingam v. Canada (MCI) [1998] FCJ No 10 and Ratheeskumar v. Canada (MCI) [2002] F.C.J. No 1697. He particularly refers to the following passage in Ramalingam:
6. In this instance, the Board challenged the validity of the birth certificate without adducing any evidence in support of its contention and, clearly, the matter of foreign documents it is not an area where the Board can claim particular knowledge. That, in my view, constitutes a reviewable error on the part of the Board.
[19] It is undisputed that it is the Board's function to weigh the evidence placed before it. One of the key points to be established in a hearing is the applicant's identity. Here the Board had doubts about the Applicant's identity, as he had forged Iraqi identity documents, could not produce credible witnesses attesting to his identity and the testimonials from other Islamic organisations did not establish his nationality.
[20] The Board rejected the marriage certificate for reasons external to the document (it failed to accord with the putative ID papers) and it rejected the birth certificate because its provenance was more than suspicious. This situation is quite different from the one encountered in Ramalingan, supra.
Conclusion
[21] One has to regard the matter in its context. The Applicant had no valid Iraqi ID document, he speaks Farsi, he has travelled extensively, he claims to be a reputed, widely known Islamic scholar, yet he could not produce any witnesses or documents that establish his Iraqi identity. The Board had the benefit of seeing and hearing the Applicants and witnesses in person. Credibility is the "heartland of its jurisdiction" (see Rahaman v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [2000] F.C.J. No. 1800 at paragraph 38) and should not lightly be interfered with. The cumulative effect of the many irregularities and inconsistencies pointed out by the Board support its finding of lack of credibility. The Applicant, either by his testimony or through documentary evidence simply was unable to establish his identity. I see no reason why the Board's finding, in light of the Applicant's arguments, should be disturbed.