[41]
In this case, in addition to representations about particular records, the applicant submits the following general considerations as indicia that the records here in question are all confidential in nature.
The records here were supplied by City Express or by another third party or were based on information supplied by City Express which has always considered information of this sort to be confidential. (As noted above, the view of the company about the nature of the records cannot in itself be conclusive.)
The information was supplied to government in response to the exercise of statutory authority by officials with the department. (This ground was not accepted as sufficient in itself for considering the information confidential in Noel, supra.)
There was an express undertaking by departmental officials that the information would be treated as confidential. Moreover, the applicant emphasizes that the records in question have not previously been disclosed, and the information contained in them is not otherwise available to the public. (The allegation of an undertaking and the reference to the fact that the records are not otherwise available are not denied but the respondent points out these could not preclude the department from meeting its obligations to provide access to information, at least since the Act came into force in 1982. I accept the respondent's recognition of obligations under the Act and thus that any undertakings by staff of the department do not preclude the respondent from disclosing records requested in accordance with the Act. In light of the purpose of the Act, neither express undertakings of staff nor the previous lack of publication of the records are determinative of whether all the records here are confidential.)
The records by their nature and content reveal sensitive and detailed information about the business operations of City Express, which information has consistently been treated as confidential by the company. (This may be relevant in part in considering the fourth requirement of s. 20(1)(b) to which we will soon turn.)
These submissions are considered by the applicant to meet the requirements for information to be confidential as set out in Montana. In my reading of that case, where on the application of third parties an order was granted not to disclose information supplied to government concerning the finances of various Indian bands, an important element was the fiduciary position of the Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development in relation to the information and his responsibilities to the bands affected. That same relationship does not apply in this case.