[20]
The plaintiff does have valid grounds for harbouring a reasonable apprehension of bias. A realistic view of the situation by any reasonable person must be that the Chairman of the Selection Board is more likely than not, consciously or unconsciously, to be biased vis-à-vis the candidacy of the plaintiff. In his own affidavit, he states (at paragraph 16) that at the meeting with the Administrator of the court "I indicated my belief that Mr. Biljan would be best qualified to represent the Federal Court on the Board". Informed as he was that the plaintiff had commenced an action against that same Mr. Biljan, Mr. Tremblay's assertion that the Administrator should be on the Board is, to say the least, rather disturbing. The Administrator was prudent in declining the invitation and Mr. Tremblay would have been well-advised to do likewise. It also appears from his affidavit that, at first, Mr. Tremblay did not intend to sit but merely to appoint members of the Board. I can only surmise that, at that early stage, he must have felt some concern about his own presence on the Board. It seems to me that if he merely changed his mind because he could find no one else to sit on the Board on October 24, 1988, it would have been more judicious on his part to set another date for the interview. Having contacted the Administrator, who after all is a defendant in this action, and having discussed with him at least the substance of the action, namely the classification of the position to "bilingual imperative", and the reclassification to "bilingual nonimperative" and the application of the plaintiff for the position, Mr. Tremblay, in my view, had placed himself in a situation where it would become difficult for the plaintiff to believe that Mr. Tremblay could perform a fair and unbiased assessment. Moreover, as mentioned earlier, Mr. Tremblay opined that he might seek references about the plaintiff not only from his immediate superior, the District Administrator, but also from Mr. Biljan himself. Under normal circumstances, that is the proper thing to do, but not when an employee is suing his superior and the subject of the action is the very position for which the employee is competing.