[3]
I will deal first with the defendant's motion because if it is well founded it precludes the success of the plaintiff's motion. The motion for a declaration that the statement of defence tendered on October 7th should have been accepted raises the question as to when an application is considered to have been "made". Subparagraph 402(2)(b)(i) permits a defence to be filed after the expiration of 30 days from the service of the statement of claim if it is filed before "an application has been made for default judgment ...". The District Administrator, following what appears to be a common practice, rejected the statement of defence for filing on October 7th because it was considered that an application had already been made for default judgment on October 3rd with the filing of the notice of motion of the plaintiff. The question is a difficult one but it appears to me that the application should not be considered to have been made until it is actually heard by the court. It has been held by this court in somewhat different contexts that an application is not made when a notice of motion is filed but only when the subject matter of the notice of motion is heard by the court [see footnote 1]. It is true that in one case [see footnote 2] it was held that for the purposes of subs. 232(4) of the Income Tax Act, an application is made within fourteen days of a seizure of documents for an order to hold a hearing to determine solicitor-client privilege questions if a notice of motion is filed within those fourteen days even though the returnable date may be some time after that period. In that particular context such an interpretation of the Income Tax Act is essential to prevent the taxpayer from having his rights defeated by the mere fact that a hearing of his motion by the Federal Court could not be held prior to the expiry of the fourteen days. The purposes of the Act would be adequately served by requiring the taxpayer to indicate within fourteen days of the seizure whether he is going to be seeking a judicial determination.