[4]
This indicates the importance of the context of the rules which are to be interpreted. In the context of default judgment, it must first be underlined that under the Rules of our court, default judgment is never automatic but a matter for the exercise of discretion by the court [see footnote 3]. Further, although by rule 439(1) an application for default judgment may be made ex parte, by rule 439(3) the court may set aside or vary a default judgment even after it is made, "on such terms as seem just" and this is done most frequently where default judgment has been obtained ex parte. In other words, the Rules favour notice to defendants before default judgment is entered. This gives them an opportunity to show cause why default judgment should not be entered or to take steps to file a defence. The interpretation I have given to rule 402(2)(b)(i) means that until the court actually hears the application for default judgment, the defendant can overcome his procedural lapse. A similar purpose, discouraging final disposition of cases on the grounds of default in procedure, may be found in rule 440, where a defendant cannot obtain dismissal of a case for want of prosecution unless he has given notice to the plaintiff that unless the plaintiff takes the necessary steps to bring the action on for trial, an application for dismissal will be made. It is surely preferable that cases properly commenced in the court be disposed of on their merits and after a proper hearing, rather than through one party taking advantage of the procedural lapse of the other. In such a context, I would therefore interpret rule 402(2)(b)(i) of the Rules to mean that a statement of defence can be filed at any time prior to the hearing of an application for default judgment whenever the notice of motion may have been filed to bring on that application. In the present case, the statement of defence should be filed nunc pro tunc effective October 7th, ten days prior to the hearing of the plaintiff's notice of motion for default judgment, thus precluding such default judgment.