[5]
Quite apart from this point of law, I would in any event have exercised my discretion against granting default judgment and in favour of allowing the defendant to file its statement of defence at this time. With respect to both questions, it is appropriate that I consider whether there is a serious doubt as to whether the plaintiff would succeed if his action were tried [see footnote 4]. There appear to be serious issues of fact as to whether certain information was in the plaintiff's personnel records in the Department of National Defence, and if so, whether such information was disclosed to anyone but himself and the Privacy Coordinator of that department. In part, the claim is for damages for libel and slander and there certainly appears to be a potential issue of whether in law any of the publication, if proven, would give rise to liability. In determining whether default judgment should be given or leave granted for late filing of a defence, it is also appropriate to consider the amount of time which has elapsed and the possible prejudice to the plaintiff. In the present case, the defendant was prepared to file the statement of defence within seven days after the time had elapsed. While no explanation for the delay has been provided by the defendant by proper evidence, this is a matter appropriate for consideration in the award of costs but it is difficult to see what prejudice could have been caused to the plaintiff. It is apparent from his statement of claim and from his submissions before me that he cannot readily proceed further with this action until there has been a determination in another proceeding launched by him in this court, T-484-88, under the Privacy Act, with respect to access to certain information now being withheld by the defendant. The plaintiff himself submitted to me that the present action should not proceed further until the Privacy Act matter is heard, that hearing now having been set for December, 1988. It is therefore, impossible to see what prejudice he has suffered by the delay of one week in the filing of the statement of defence.