[74]
In closing on this issue, I adopt the comments of my late colleague Justice Rouleau in
Chau v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, [2002] F.T.R. Uned. 55; [2002] F.C.J. No. 119 (T.D.). There, he wrote at paragraphs 27 through 28:
"The applicant in the present case raised a number of arguments which, when considered together, amount to several inconveniences by leaving Canada and submit an application abroad which is the normal rule laid down by Parliament. As Lemieux, J., rightly state in
Mayburov v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)
, [2000] F.C.J. No. 953 (QL) at para. 39, inconvenience is not the criteria of undue hardship as laid out in the guidelines. The material filed in support of her application leads one to believe that the Applicant could well be a model immigrant and a welcome addition to the Canadian community; she has shown herself to be law-abiding, hard-working, enterprising and thrifty since her illegal entry into Canada. However, that is not the test as to whether or not there are sufficient humanitarian and compassionate grounds to warrant exceptional relief. As Pelletier, J., stated in
Irimie
, supra, at para. 26:
'[...] To make it the test is to make the H & C process an ex post facto screening device which supplants the screening process contained in the
Immigration Act
and
Regulations
. This would encourage gambling on refugee claims in the belief that if someone can stay in Canada long enough to demonstrate that they are the kind of persons Canada wants, they will be allowed to stay. The H & C process is not designated to eliminate hardship; it is designated to provide relief from unusual, undeserved or disproportionate hardship.'
"The burden which the applicant had to discharge was whether the Immigration Officer's decision not to grant her an exemption for the inland processing of her permanent residence application was unreasonable. When deciding this issue, the reviewing court cannot overstep its role. In the absence of an error in the legal sense, the Court could not and should not substitute its opinion for that of the Immigration Officer. The perspective of the reviewing judge is to examine the evidence before the Immigration Officer and determine whether there was absence of evidence supporting her conclusion or whether her decision was made contrary to the overwhelming weight of the evidence. I cannot reach that conclusion."