[21]
After having studied at length the facts giving rise to the complaint and the arguments submitted by both parties, investigator Anick Hébert came to the following conclusions:
[translation]
40. The evidence shows that as soon as the respondent was advised of the complainant's disability, the complainant was asked to remain at home on a paid leave of absence until he could undergo a functional and vocational assessment to measure his fitness for work. An agreement was concluded between the complainant and the respondent to the effect that the complainant would undergo psychotherapy before the assessment. The respondent agreed to pay the fees for psychotherapy for the complainant, as well as his travel and accommodation expenses. Following a request made by the complainant's therapist, the respondent agreed to pay for additional psychotherapy sessions.
41. The evidence shows that following the treatments, the complainant's therapist declared him fit to return to work. Accordingly, the respondent prepared a return-to-work plan. Meetings were held with the complainant, and in August 2003 a position classified CR-04 was offered to the complainant. The respondent promised to pay the complainant at the PM-01 level. The complainant refused this position.
42. The evidence shows that in November 2003 the respondent offered the complainant a position at the CR-05 level, but he refused it. In 2004, the respondent made new attempts at having the complainant return to work, but it was to no avail, as the complainant refused to co-operate with the respondent.
43. The evidence shows that the complainant has been off work since February 21, 2002, and has been paid at the PM-01 level since then.
On the basis of this analysis, the investigator recommended that the Commission dismiss the complaint because [translation] "the evidence does not support the complainant's allegation to the effect that the respondent acted in a discriminatory manner in the course of employment by treating him differently and by refusing to accommodate him because of his disability". It should be noted that this investigation report was forwarded to the parties so that they could send in their written submissions to the Commission before it rendered a final decision.