[1]
Hugessen, J.
[orally]: The background to this litigation has been very recently and very thoroughly set out by my brother MacKay, J., in reasons delivered only a few days ago. [see 138 F.T.R. 94] Without apology, I set it out again in his words:
"Apotex Inc. was granted a Notice of Compliance (NOC) under the
Food and Drug Regulations
, C.R.C., c. 870, by the respondent Minister of Health in relation to Apo-lovastatin tablets on March 26, 1997. That drug product is a generic version of the Merck lovastatin medicine sold in Canada under the trademark MEVACOR® for which Merck had earlier obtained an NOC in 1988 for treatment of elevated levels of cholesterol, and subsequent NOC's for other treatments.
"The NOC was granted to Apotex after the Court had dismissed an application by Merck for an order of prohibition under the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
, SOR/93-133 (the
Regulations
). The decision of my colleague Mr. Justice Rothstein, dated March 26, 1997, (Court file T-1305-93) was made following expiry of the 30 month statutory stay under s. 7 of the
Regulations
. In accord with those
Regulations
Apotex had applied for an NOC and by notice of allegation had advised Merck that Apotex' generic product would not infringe Merck's patents in relation to its lovastatin product. Apotex had later issued a second notice of allegation, in relation to its application for an NOC, which led to a second application for a prohibition order by Merck under the
Regulations
, but Apotex subsequently withdrew the second notice of allegation in February 1997.
"From subsequent inquiries, through access to information requests, and by requests to the Ministry of Health, it appeared to Merck that the product monograph for Apo-lovastatin, approved with Apotex' NOC on March 26, 1997, referred to the Apotex product utilizing a microorganism, Aspergillus obscurus, which is said by Merck to be essentially the same as that which is the subject of Merck's patents. Thereafter, the Health Department advised that the product monograph for Apo-lovastatin was in error, since the process by which the product was produced, at the time of the grant of the NOC, was one that utilized another microorganism, Coniothyrium fuckelii. The department indicated an amended product monograph would be issued correctly identifying the microorganism used by Apotex. On July 11, 1997 after this proceeding had commenced the Minister issued a letter to Apotex enclosing a new cover page and page 1 for the product monograph earlier approved, correcting what were considered clerical errors.
"On June 12, 1997, the applicants Merck filed a statement of claim alleging infringement of their patents, for their lovastatin product, by Apotex in its production and sale of Apo-lovastatin. In that action (T-1272-97) the respondents Apotex are defendants. In that action Merck seeks various declaratory orders concerning infringement by Apotex, concerning the validity of Merck's patents, concerning unfair competition and passing off by Apotex, and also a permanent injunction against the defendants, delivery up of infringing product, damages or an accounting of profits, punitive damages, costs and interest. All forms of relief sought are directed against the defendants Apotex, and the Minister and the Attorney General, respondents in this proceeding, are not joined as parties or intervenors in the action.
"On the same day, June 12, 1997, this proceeding by originating notice of motion was filed by the applicants Merck against the respondent Ministers, and Apotex respondents were subsequently joined as parties. The application as filed seeks judicial review of the decision of the Minister of Health made on March 26, 1997 to issue the NOC to Apotex in respect of its Apo-lovastatin product. The application seeks four interim and interlocutory orders against the Minister of Health, directing, until final determination of this application, that the Minister revoke or suspend the NOC issued March 26, 1997 to Apotex, and also an order prohibiting him from issuing a new or amended NOC to Apotex for lovastatin until the Minister requires Apotex to file a new submission for that product and Apotex has sent a new notice of allegation to Merck in respect of lovastatin in accord with the
Regulations
. An order prohibiting review of any further or amended submission of Apotex until it has filed a new submission and complies with the
Regulations
is also sought, as is a permanent order revoking or suspending the NOC granted March 26, 1997, presumably after hearing of this application. Generally similar interim relief but directed to the Apotex corporations was sought by Merck in its action in T-1272-97 and by motion. Merck sought, in both this application and in its action, interim injunctive relief. That was denied by my colleague Mr. Justice Dubé, by Orders dated July 2, 1997.
"Affidavits were filed, three by Merck in support of its application, one on behalf of the respondent Minister of Health by Mary Elizabeth Carman, Director of the Bureau of Pharmaceutical Assessment of the Therapeutic Products Directorate of Health Canada, and two on behalf of Apotex Inc. by Dr. Bernard Sherman, Chairman of that corporation. Apparently in the course of cross-examination of Ms. Carman, responses to questions and to requests for production of documents were extensive, and the Department of Health was prepared to be open and frank in its disclosure of matters related to the decision of March 26, here in question. From that and from cross-examination of Dr. Sherman on his affidavit, the Merck applicants believe there are additional facts which would strengthen their case. That development, and the form of their initial originating notice of motion, which, under grounds for the application, sets out a detailed statement of allegations of fact upon which Merck applicants rely, led Merck to move for leave to amend the originating notice of motion. The draft of the amendments proposed and Merck's applications, filed at the same time, for orders for the affiants Ms. Carman and Dr. Sherman to re-attend and answer further questions earlier refused or objected to, led to the respondents Apotex' motion to convert these proceedings to an action. Two days after that motion was filed and the day before this application was heard, Merck filed an amended statement of claim in the action in file T-1272-97, as they were entitled to do, no defence having yet been filed by Apotex. Those amendments delete from the statement of claim, references in the earlier version which duplicated, or at least reflected, some of the matters dealt with in this application for judicial review."