[4]
Although the defendant has admitted most of the statement of claim, it was not without asserting additional facts. It is worthwhile, then, to recite some of the defendant's allegations:
"4. IN FURTHER RESPONSE TO the allegations contained in paragraph 1 of the Statement of Claim, the defendant states that in conjunction with his sponsorship, the plaintiff, on September 19, 1988, completed a statutory declaration in which he declared that:
(a) he has never been married;
(b) he had no children; and
(c) he recognized his responsibility to advise the Canadian High Commission in writing if there was any change in his marital status or if he had any children prior to leaving for Canada.
"5. IN FURTHER RESPONSE TO the allegations contained in paragraph 3 of the Statement of Claim, the defendant states that the plaintiff arrived in Toronto and upon arrival was asked if he had any dependants, to which the plaintiff answered in the negative.
"6. IN FURTHER RESPONSE TO the allegations contained in paragraph 4 of the Statement of Claim, the defendant states that prior to the immigration officer's report for inquiry:
(a) the plaintiff returned to Guyana in 1992 and married the mother of his son in Guyana on August 19, 1992; and
(b) in November of 1992, the plaintiff sponsored his wife and child for entrance to Canada.
"7. IN FURTHER RESPONSE TO the allegations contained in paragraphs 6 and 7 of the Statement of Claim, the defendant states as follows:
(a) that the plaintiff was represented at the inquiry;
(b) that the plaintiff indicated that he understood the nature of the allegations made against him and the possible consequences to him from those allegations;
(c) that the plaintiff, through his representative, conceded the facts as alleged by the Minister's representative; and
(d) that the adjudicator found that the plaintiff was granted landing by reason of a misrepresentation and that the misrepresentation was material.
"8. IN FURTHER RESPONSE TO the allegations contained in paragraph 8 of the Statement of Claim, the defendant adds the following:
(a) that the plaintiff was represented before the Board;
(b) that the plaintiff's representative was asked if the legal validity of the removal order against the plaintiff was being challenged;
(c) that the plaintiff, through his representative, indicated that the legal validity of the removal order was not being challenged;
(d) that the Board, in its written reasons, noted that the legal validity of the deportation was not challenged and that the case was based entirely on the equitable jurisdiction of the Board, having regard to all the circumstances of the case;
(e) that the Board found as fact that the plaintiff deliberately hid the birth of his son from immigration officials.
"9. IN FURTHER RESPONSE TO the allegations contained in paragraph 9 of the Statement of Claim, the Respondent denies that the sole basis for the leave application was the claim of ultra vires regarding Immigration Regulation 6(1). The defendant states that the Application for Leave did not contain any claim regarding the ultra vires of any legislation; rather, the claim in the Application for Leave is based on an allegation that the Board failed to consider all the circumstances of the case. The defendant recognizes that the plaintiff's Memorandum of Argument contained an argument regarding the alleged ultra vires of Regulation 6(1) and that Leave was subsequently granted by this Honourable Court.
"10. IN FURTHER RESPONSE TO the allegations contained in paragraph 10 of the Statement of Claim, the defendant admits that the Honourable Mr. Justice Heald dismissed the application for judicial review by decision dated June 27, 1995, but denies that His Lordship held that he had no jurisdiction to decide the issue of the vires of the impugned regulation. The defendant states that His Lordship heard extensive argument from both the plaintiff (Applicant) and Respondent on the issue of the vires of Regulation 6(1) and determined that the plaintiff's submissions were not persuasive in any way on all issues, including the issue of ultra vires. His Lordship rejected the plaintiff's arguments regarding the alleged ultra vires regulation. His Lordship also determined that the Board had not committed any reviewable error by not addressing an issue that was not raised, and was in fact conceded, before it.
"11. IN FURTHER RESPONSE TO the Statement of Claim as a whole, the defendant pleads and relies on the doctrine of res judicata and estoppel by matter of record."