[26]
The authors of that opus then refer the reader "to the annotations under s. 3 of the
Act
." Under s. 3, at p. 58, there is this annotation about the purpose of the
Act
, thus:
"
Mannan v. Canada (Min. of Employment & Immigration)
(1991), 16 Imm. L.R.(2d) 73; 48 F.T.R. 259 (T.D.).
This decision provides a useful statement of first principles which are to govern the court's approach to interpreting the
Immigration Act
.
The court stated that the purpose of the
Immigration Act
was to regulate immigration into Canada, which means that some immigration is permitted and some is rejected according to the law.
To determine the purpose of a statute the court recommended the procedure in
Heydon's Case
(1584), 3 Co. Rep. 7a; 76 E.R. 637, to the effect that the true determination of a statute is to proceed according to the following principles:
1. the determination of what the common law was before the making of the
Immigration Act
;
2. the determination of the mischief and defect for which the common law did not provide;
3. the examination of the remedy that Parliament has resolved and appointed to cure the problem; and
4. it is the responsibility of judges to make such construction of the statute as required to suppress the mischief which Parliament addressed and advance the remedy which Parliament provided. The court is to suppress subtle inventions and evasions designed to continue the mischief.
The court noted that at Confederation section 95 of the
Constitution Act, 1867
provided that each province can make laws in relation to immigration into the province and that the Parliament of Canada may from time to time make laws in relation to immigration into all or any of the provinces and that any provincial law in relation to immigration has effect only so long as it is not repugnant to a law of the Parliament of Canada in relation to immigration. Further, the court noted that section 95(25) [sic 91(25)] distributed legislative power in relation to naturalization and aliens to Parliament.
The court then went on to deal with the merits of this case and dismissed the application for judicial review."