[29]
Here are the pertinent passages, authored by Heald, J.A., reported on pp. 128-130:
"... I agree with that interpretation and would apply it to the word 'children' as employed in the 'Application for Permanent Residence' in this case. I agree with the board that the use of the word 'children' in this application for permanent residence is clear and unambiguous and is wide enough to encompass the appellant's children in Uganda. Accordingly, in failing to disclose their existence on the application, the appellant has made a misrepresentation of fact.
"Turning now to the second ground of alleged error, I conclude that the board properly applied the relevant jurisprudence to the circumstances at bar, and did not err in concluding that (Vol. 2, A.B. 313 [p. 146, Imm. L.R.(2d)]:
'[T]he appellant's failure to disclose the existence of the children prevented the immigration officer from making inquiries regarding the circumstances of the children in determining whether or not to approve the appellant's application for permanent residence.'
"The leading authority on the proper test for materiality in these circumstances was articulated by Laskin, J. (as he then was), in the
Brooks
case [1974] S.C.R. 850; 36 D.L.R.(3d) 522, at p. 873 S.C.R.:
'Lest there be any doubt on the matter as a result of the Board's reasons, I would repudiate any contention or conclusion that materiality under s. 19(1)(e)(viii) requires that the untruth or the misleading information in an answer or answers be such as to have concealed an independent ground of deportation. The untruth or misleading information may fall short of this and yet have been an inducing factor in admission. Evidence, as was given in the present case, that certain incorrect answers would have had no influence in the admission of a person is, of course, relevant to materiality. But also relevant is whether the untruths or the misleading answers had the effect of foreclosing or averting further inquiries,
even if those inquiries might not have turned up any independent ground of deportation
' (Emphasis added.)
"In the case of
Juayong v. Canada (Minister of Employment & Immigration
(1988) 99 N.R. 78, this court applied the
Brooks
test, supra, to para. 27(1)(e) of the
Act
, which is also the relevant paragraph in the case at bar. In summary, it is my conclusion that the board did not err in deciding that the misrepresentation here was material since its effect was to foreclose inquiries concerning the status and circumstances of the appellant's children in Uganda, which circumstances could, conceivably, be very relevant to the determination of the appellant's application for permanent residence."