[4]
In arriving at this conclusion, the Registrar found as follows:
1. The onus of establishing no reasonable likelihood of confusion between the proposed trademark and the registered trademark rests on the applicant.
2. In so doing, regard must be had for the indicia found in s. 6(5) of the
Trade Marks Act
and including an enquiry into all the surrounding circumstances.
3. The registered trademark "Masterpiece" possesses some degree of inherent distinctiveness though somewhat suggestive with respect to the quality of the wares. On the other hand, the proposed mark "K.C. Masterpiece" and design possesses a higher degree of distinctiveness in view of the design feature.
4. Concerning the nature of the wares and their channels of trade, the Registrar conceded that barbecue sauce on the one hand and cakes and chocolates on the other are not competing products and by their dissimilar nature would not be expected to emanate from the same source; nevertheless, consideration had to be given to the fact they are all food products normally found in the same outlets.
5. Although there was evidence that the registered mark "Masterpiece" covered wares available only through Sears retail outlets and were generally promoted at Christmastime, the Registrar noted that no such restrictions apply to the respondent's statement of wares and the wares involved, being food products, could very well find themselves on the same shelf in the same store.
6. Although the proposed mark has a higher degree of distinctiveness by reason of its design features, the word "Masterpiece" is its more striking element. In applying the principle of first impression and imperfect recollection, the Registrar concluded that if a determinate conclusion on the confusion issue could not be made, that issue had to be decided against the applicant.
7. Finally, the Registrar considered the use on the Trademarks Register and in trade names and corporate names of the word "Masterpiece". She found that not much weight could be given to this. The wares and services covered by registered marks were quite dissimilar and the use of the word in corporate name inconclusive. In fact, the wares of the parties belong to the same general class and it is on this basis that the issue should be decided.
The Case For The Appellant