[5]
Appellant's counsel argues that the Registrar came to the wrong conclusion and that it is well within the court's jurisdiction on an appeal of this nature to form its own opinion as to whether or not the two competing marks are confusing. In more specific terms, counsel submits as follows:
1. An assessment of the confusion issue requires that the totality of the mark must be considered as a matter of first impression by a person of average intelligence acting with ordinary caution, i.e., would the use of both trademarks in the same area likely lead to the inference that the wares involved have a common source. The appellant urges the court to follow
Park Avenue Furniture Corp. v. Wickes/Simmons Bedding Ltd. et al.
(1991), 130 N.R. 223; 37 C.P.R.(3d) 413 (F.C.A.);
Canadian Schenley Distilleries Ltd. v. Canada's Manitoba Distillery Ltd.
(1975), 25 C.P.R.(2d) 1 (F.C.T.D.); H.J. Fox,
The Canadian Law of Trade Marks and Unfair Competition
(3rd Ed. 1972), pp. 167-169.
2. The registered mark "Masterpiece" is a very weak mark. It is a common dictionary term, a seemingly laudatory or descriptive word and commonly adopted as a trademark. Such marks are entitled to only a narrow ambit of protection. There is quoted in that regard the words of Lord Simon in
Office Cleaning Services v. Westminster Window & Gen'l Cleaners Ltd.
as repeated by Rand, J., in
General Motors Corp. v. Bellows
, [1949] S.C.R. 678, at p. 691:
"It comes in the end, I think, to no more than this, that where a trader adopts words in common use for his trade name, some risk of confusion is inevitable. But that risk must be run unless the first user is allowed unfairly to monopolize the words. The court will accept comparatively small differences as sufficient to avert confusion. A greater degree of discrimination may fairly be expected from the public where a trade name consists wholly or in part of words descriptive of the articles to be sold or the services to be rendered."
Appellant's counsel also refers to Harold J. Fox (op. cit.) at p. 173 as follows:
"When it is contended that two words are confusing by reason of the fact that they suggest the same idea regard should be had to the nature of the words. If the words are distinctive, in the sense of being invented words, small differences will not be sufficient to distinguish them,
whereas if the words are common or descriptive in meaning, they must be taken with their disadvantages. No person is entitled to fence in the common of the English language and words of a general nature cannot be appropriated over a wide area.
" (Emphasis added)
3. Appellant's counsel argues, on the facts before the Registrar, that although the respondent's mark "Masterpiece" was limited to cakes and chocolates, its use became even more limited when at the material date, the respondent had effectively restricted its use to fruitcake. In terms of the "material date", the Federal Court of Appeal in the case of
Park Avenue Furniture Corp.
(op. cit.) has now made it quite clear that on the issue of confusion, the material date is the date of the disposition of the opposition proceedings. In the interim, of course, more "Masterpiece" registrations have found their way into the Register and as a result, the distinctiveness of the mark has become more diluted. Indeed, a trademark "Meaty Masterpiece" for cat food has been allowed for registration and there is common evidence that in the food business, cat food is regarded as an ordinary food product.
4. A further result of the foregoing is that although the competing marks both cover food products generally, regard should be had to an inherent, common or well-understood distinction between a condiment, such as barbecue sauce on the one hand and a confectionery, such as fruitcake, on the other.
5. Appellant's counsel suggests that the Registrar did not adequately respond to the evidence of use by the respondent over the years 1981 to 1985. "Masterpiece" is a house brand of the respondent and the product sold exclusively in Sears outlets. Products under that mark are found in candy counters and a mere 0.65% of all the respondent's floor space is devoted to all its food products. This suggests, says counsel, a very limited exposure of the respondent's mark. This implies, he says, that not much distinctiveness attaches to it.
The Case For The Respondent