[6]
Respondent's counsel draws the court's attention to the carefully drafted reasons in the Registrar's decision. Counsel suggests that the Registrar's approach indicates to what extent she considered the various indicia in s. 6(2) and s. 6(5) of the
Trade Marks Act
to arrive at her conclusion. An analysis of her decision discloses the following:
1. The Registrar notes the weakness of the "Masterpiece" trademark.
2. She recognizes that the onus is on an applicant to prove that as between the two marks "Masterpiece" and "K.C. Masterpiece" and design, there is no likelihood of confusion.
3. She notes the respondent's use of its trademark stretching over a number of years, its advertisements in Sears catalogues and its identification with Sears confectionery products.
4. She applies the test of first impression and imperfect recollection to conclude that the word "Masterpiece" predominates.
5. She finds that both marks are in association with the same class of wares, namely food products.
6. She finds that although the wares are dissimilar, they both cover food products which could normally be found in the same outlets.
7. Finding herself unable to make an unqualified determination as to whether or not there is a likelihood of confusion, she rightly relies on the onus provision to allow the opposition and refuse registration.
[Section 6 of the
Trade Marks Act
stated:
"6(1) For the purposes of this Act, a trademark or trade name is confusing with another trademark or trade name if the use of the first mentioned trademark or trade name would cause confusion with the last mentioned trademark or trade name in the manner and circumstances described in this section.
"(2) The use of a trademark causes confusion with another trademark if the use of both trademarks in the same area would be likely to lead to the inference that the wares or services associated with those trademarks are manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by the same person, whether or not the wares or services are of the same general class.
"(3) The use of a trademark causes confusion with a trade name if the use of both the trademark and trade name in the same area would be likely to lead to the inference that the wares or services associated with the trademark and those associated with the business carried on under the trade name are manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by the same person, whether or not the wares or services are of the same general class.
"(4) The use of a trade name causes confusion with a trademark if the use of both the trade name and trademark in the same area would be likely to lead to the inference that the wares or services associated with the business carried on under the trade name and those associated with the trademark are manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by the same person, whether or not the wares or services are of the same general class.
"(5) In determining whether trademarks or trade names are confusing, the court or the Registrar, as the case may be, shall have regard to all the surrounding circumstances including
(a) the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks or trade names and the extent to which they have become known;
(b) the length of time the trademarks or trade names have been in use;
(c) the nature of the wares, services or business;
(d) the nature of the trade; and
(e) the degree of resemblance between the trademarks or trade names in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them."]