[44]
In this regard, the Tribunal wrote [see footnote 17]:
"While it will never fully be known why the Complainant [Ms. Oster] was called to Mr. Crain's office, what occurred in that office can, as I have said, be gleaned from the evidence. Mr. Crain was President of the Respondent [the Union] and while it was not his responsibility to manage the day-to-day affairs of the hiring hall, the job of the dispatcher, he undoubtedly had a general supervisory authority and responsibility. In my opinion the conversation he carried on with Mr. Robertson at Norsk had clearly to do with the posted dispatch of the cook/deckhand position on the Texada Crown. By the end of that conversation, one could not have reasonably come to any other conclusion but that the Complainant would be discouraged from applying because the sleeping accommodations were not suitable for her as a woman. That was the reason and the only reason given at that point. To the extent that a standard or goal can be discerned from what occurred during the March 8th incident, one must proceed from there to determine whether that standard or goal is discriminatory.
"I see no evidence of a fundamental standard of a far reaching goal rather, it can be better described as a practice that women are discouraged from positions on tugs where accommodations are 'a little too close quartered', as Mr. Robertson put it. The Respondent's evidence was that there had never been a request for shared sleeping accommodations. This 'standard' existed in the particulars of this case though men and women would not be occupying the same sleeping quarters at the same time because of the alternate six-hour shifts.
"What occurred in Mr. Crain's office, in my opinion, constitutes prima facie evidence of a discriminatory practice based on sex contrary to section 9(1)(c) of the
Act
. The Respondent acted in a way that deprived the Complainant of an employment opportunity based on a prohibited ground of discrimination. It is no answer, in my view, that the full process of the dispatch procedure was not exhausted to a formal conclusion. What occurred constituted a discouragement to the Complainant about participating any further in the process in relation to this particular dispatch ..."