[71]
Mr. Justice Jackson, speaking for the Court in Graver Tank, described the purpose of the doctrine as being to prevent "the unscrupulous copyist ... [making] unimportant and insubstantial changes and substitutions in the patent which, though adding nothing, would be enough to take the copied matter outside the claim". [see footnote 28] After noting that the assessment of equivalence is a matter of asking about an alleged infringing device, whether "it performs substantially the same function in substantially the same way to obtain the same result", [see footnote 29] he continues:
"... In its early development, the doctrine was usually applied in cases involving devices where there was equivalence in mechanical components. Subsequently, however, the same principles were also applied to compositions, where there was equivalence between chemical ingredients. Today the doctrine is applied to mechanical or chemical equivalents in compositions or devices. See discussions and cases collected in 3
Walker on Patents
(Deller's ed. 1937) §§ 489-492
Ellis; Patent Claims
(1949) §§ 59-60.
"What constitutes equivalency must be determined against the context of the patent, the prior art, and the particular circumstances of the case. Equivalence, in the patent law, is not the prisoner of a formula and is not an absolute to be considered in a vacuum. It does not require complete identity for every purpose and in every respect. In determining equivalents, things equal to the same thing may not be equal to each other and, by the same token, things for most purposes different may sometimes be equivalents. Consideration must be given to the purpose for which an ingredient is used in a patent, the qualities it has when combined with the other ingredients, and the function which it is intended to perform. An important factor is whether persons reasonably skilled in the art would have known of the interchangeability of an ingredient not contained in the patent with one that was." [see footnote 30]