[18]
All of the visa officer's responding affidavit is important, but the following passages are quite pertinent and compelling:
"9. On the basis of this preliminary review, it appeared that Mr. Saggu might meet immigration requirements. This assessment was made on the assumption that he met the minimum requirements for the proposed occupation and he was called to interview so that it could be determined if he did indeed meet these requirements. On 27 January 1992, Mr. Saggu and his wife attended at the Canadian High Commission for his immigration interview. I conducted the interview with the assistance of an interpreter who was fluent in the English and Punjabi languages.
. . . . .
"12. I also assessed Mr. Saggu's knowledge of Canada's official languages. Mr. Saggu indicated that he had no knowledge of French. In order to assess his knowledge of English, I asked a series of simple questions such as his name and his date and place of birth. Mr. Saggu was unable to answer these basic questions. Through the interpreter, I asked if he had any knowledge of English. He indicated that he did have some knowledge and thus I assessed his knowledge of written English. I asked him to read a passage from "Job Futures Occupational Outlooks, Volume 1". In particular, I asked him to read a passage which dealt with tool and dye makers, his intended occupation in Canada. This passage is attached hereto as Exhibit F. After [his] reading the passage aloud, I asked Mr. Saggu some simple questions about the meaning of the passage. Mr. Saggu was unable to answer these questions. Later in the interview, I again assessed Mr. Saggu's ability in the English language. His knowledge of the language was poor. I therefore determined that 2 units of assessment should be assessed for factor 8 for knowledge of English and 0 units of assessment for knowledge of French.
"13. I also assessed the personal suitability of Mr. Saggu and his dependents to become successfully established in Canada based upon Mr. Saggu's adaptability, motivation, initiative, resourcefulness and other similar qualities. I noted that Mr. Saggu had never previously travelled outside India and that he had little concept of life in Canada. This made me question Mr. Saggu's adaptability. Mr. Saggu had not prepared for the interview by trying to investigate employment possibilities in Canada for tool and dye makers. This made me question Mr. Saggu's initiative and resourcefulness. Mr. Saggu impressed me as a soft-spoken, pleasant individual but I came to the conclusion that, even with the assistance that he would receive from his family in Winnipeg, he would have difficulty in becoming successfully established in Canada. I therefore determined that Mr. Saggu should be awarded 4 units of assessment for factor 9.
"14. I awarded Mr. Saggu the following units of assessment. (Exhibit C refers.)
Age	10
Occupational Factor	05
Specific Vocational
Preparation (SVP)	11
Experience	06
Arranged Employment	00
Demographic Factor	05
Education	10
English	02
French	00
Bonus	15
Personal Suitability	04
TOTAL	68
Pursuant to s. 10(1)(c)(i) of the
Immigration Regulations
, an applicant in the assisted relative category, must receive at least 55 units of assessment. Given that all other categories of applicants require 70 units of assessment, to ensure a consistency of approach, visa officers add 15 units of assessment for assisted relatives. Thus, administratively, 70 units of assessment are required by all applicants regardless of category.
"15. Because Mr. Saggu did not appear to meet immigration requirements, I also assessed Mr. Saggu's wife on an informal basis to determine if she might meet immigration requirements if she were to submit a formal application. Ms. Saggu had no knowledge of English or French and had never worked outside the home. I therefore determined that it was most unlikely that she would meet immigration requirements if she were to submit an application. I noted no other occupational skills with a positive occupational demand factor for either Mr. Saggu or his spouse which would have enabled them to meet immigration requirements.
"16. I also considered possible humanitarian and compassionate grounds which would have warranted special consideration but found that there were insufficient grounds to warrant admission on that basis. Mr. Saggu and his family had always lived in India and most of his wife's siblings also resided in India. Furthermore, Mr. Saggu was operating his own business and appeared to be relatively well-established.
"17. At the conclusion of the interview, I informed Mr. Saggu and his spouse of my concerns regarding their application. I asked them if they had any further information to bring to my attention but they indicated that they had nothing further to add."