[15]
The grounds in support of the applications for judicial review are, to all intents and purposes, identical. The applicant submits that when the decision to transfer him from Donnacona to Ste-Anne-des-Plaines was made, he did not have the opportunity [Translation] "to respond to the accusations made against him, as required by the Federal Court of Appeal in
Demaria v. Regional Classification Board
(1986), 69 N.R. 135; 30 C.C.C.(3d) 55". In order to better understand the applicant's argument, I reproduce the five submissions he made him in support of the second ground in file no. T-2652-97:
[Translation] "1. Knowing that the applicant is presumed to have committed the assault he is accused of is merely an extension of the charge against him. Nonetheless, he is still unaware of the basic details such as the place and circumstances of the assault, without which information any form of defence is futile.
"2. The arguments based on
Demaria
and
Lee
are again applicable. The issue is always one of balancing the applicant's right to disclosure of information for the purpose of making a relevant and intelligent defence against the duty to preserve the identity of informers.
"3. A simple practical example will very clearly establish that the applicant could have received much more information essential to his defence, without any violation of the informers' identity being possible: if the applicant had simply known the place, time and duration and very summary circumstances of the assault, he could have presented a defence asserting, inter alia, an alibi, if he has one.
"4. That being said, how can this simple information, which is deemed to be known to the person of whose guilt we are supposedly convinced, be likely to endanger the safety of the informers?
"5. It has therefore been clearly proved that the Correctional Service, through the Review Board, has once again violated procedural fairness in this case, by failing to disclose
all
the relevant information available which is not likely to disclose the identity of an informer (
Lee
, supra)."