[21]
Both of the majority judges, Mr. Justice Pratte and Mr. Justice Marceau, for different reasons, concluded that the principles of natural justice had been observed. I entirely agree with the reasons stated by Marceau, J.A., which were also quoted with approval by Mr. Justice Strayer (as he then was) in
Camphaug v. Canada et al.
(1990), 34 F.T.R. 165. In addition to distinguishing
Demaria
, Marceau, J.A., explained the nature and scope of the "audi alteram partem" rule in the context of a decision to transfer an inmate. I therefore shall reproduce the reasons of Marceau, J.A., found at pp. 341 to 344 [F.C.] of the report:
"I readily agree with Mr. Justice Pratte that the judgment appealed from here cannot be allowed to stand. I must say however, with respect, that I have some difficulty with the reasons he gives in support of this conclusion, and I wish to express my personal views in a few brief comments.
"1. I did not understand the appellant as having at any time acknowledged that he had somehow been compelled to breach the duty to act fairly to which he was normally bound. What the appellant said is simply that, in fulfilling his duty to act fairly, he had given the respondent all the information he could without, in effect, divulging the identity of his informers. So the question is not, I think, whether the rule of confidentiality respecting informers can
relieve
a decision-maker from his duty to act fairly, it is rather whether the rule of confidentiality can
influence
, as much as it did here, the content of that duty. And the difference, to me, is of the utmost importance, since I have the greatest difficulty in accepting that the 'audi alteram partem' principle, which is what the duty to act fairly is all about, can ever be completely disregarded otherwise than in a case of an exceptional emergency and for quite a short period of time. (See:
Cardinal et al. v. Director of Kent Institution
, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 643).
"The rationale behind the 'audi alteram partem' principle, which simply requires the participation, in the making of a decision, of the individual whose rights or interests may be affected, is, of course, that the individual may always be in a position to bring forth information, in the form of facts or arguments, that could help the decision-maker reach a fair and prudent conclusion. It has long been recognized to be only rational as well as practical that the extent and character of such participation should depend on the circumstances of the case and the nature of the decision to be made. This view of the manner in which the principle must be given effect ought to be the same whether it comes into play through the jurisprudential duty to act fairly, or the common law requirement of natural justice, or as one of the prime constituents of the concept of fundamental justice referred to in s. 7 of the
Charter
. The principle is obviously the same everywhere it applies.
"As I see it, the problem here is whether the 'audi alteram partem' principle, in the circumstances that prevailed, required that more information be given to the inmate before asking him for his representations. In my judgment, having regard to the nature of the problem the appellant was facing and his responsibility toward those entrusted to his care, it did not.
"2. It seems to me that, to appreciate the practical requirements of the 'audi alteram partem' principle, it is wrong to put on the same level all administrative decisions involving inmates in penitentiaries, be they decisions of the National Parole Board respecting the revocation of parole, or decisions of disciplinary boards dealing with disciplinary offences for which various types of punishments, up to administrative segregation, can be imposed, or decisions, such as the one here involved, of prison authorities approving the transfer of inmates from one institution to another for administrative and good order reasons. Not only do these various decisions differ as to the individual's rights, privileges or interests they may affect, which may lead to different standards of procedural safeguards; they may also differ, and even more significantly, as to their purposes and justifications, something which cannot but influence the content of the information that the individual needs to be provided with, in order to render his participation, in the making of the decision, wholly meaningful. In the case of a decision aimed at imposing a sanction or a punishment for the commission of an offence, fairness dictates that the person charged be given all available particulars of the offence. Not so in the case of a decision to transfer made for the sake of the orderly and proper administration of the institution and based on a belief that the inmate should, because of concerns raised as to his behaviour, not remain where he is. In such a case, there would be no basis for requiring that the inmate be given as many particulars of all the wrong doings of which he may be suspected. Indeed, in the former case, what has to be verified is the very commission of the offence and the person involved should be given the fullest opportunity to convince of his innocence; in the latter case, it is merely the reasonableness and the seriousness of the belief on which the decision would be based and the participation of the person involved has to be rendered meaningful for that but nothing more. In the situation we are dealing with here, guilt was not what had to be confirmed, it was whether the information received from six different sources was sufficient to raise a valid concern and warrant the transfer.
"3. There are obvious essential differences between the situation considered by the court in
Demaria
, on which the trial judge relied exclusively, and the one which is before us today:
a) In
Demaria
, the ground for transfer was the belief that the inmate had brought cyanide into the prison; it was then an act, an operation which had taken place and was not likely to be repeated. In our case, the ground is the belief that the inmate was involved in a system of extortion, which could very well be still going on or reactivated.
b) In
Demaria
, there was no direct reason to believe that the safety of fellow prisoners was involved; there were no obvious victims of the alleged misconduct. Here, on the contrary, extortion through threat of violence, by its very nature, implicates victims and spells danger for the safety of others.
c) In
Demaria
, there was independent evidence obtained by the police. Here, the entire body of evidence was obtained from informants who had obvious objective and realistic fears of reprisals at the hands of the alleged extortionists.
d) In
Demaria
, the withholding of information was complete and merely justified by a blanket claim, as characterized by Hugessen, J. [at p. 78], that 'all preventive security information' is confidential and (cannot) be released'. Here, on the one hand, the information given is definitely more substantial — including the inmate's Progress Summary Report in its entirety, the extent of the concern of the Warden, and cogent reasons for nondisclosure of further particulars. On the other hand, we have the unequivocal sworn statement of the prison authorities that no further information could be safely released, notably the statement of the Warden who, as the trial judge so rightly proclaims [at pp. 271 C.R.; 153 F.T.R.], 'is more familiar with prison conditions than the court and is in a position to give a more realistic appraisal of what the inmate population is able to deduce from any given information.'
"I would dispose of the appeal as suggested by Mr. Justice Pratte."