[27]
In this instance part of the Union's prima facie case must also establish that there is in fact a prima facie case for contempt against Telus Communications Inc., the parent of the unincorporated subsidiary, Telus Mobility. As I have found, there is a prima facie case against Telus Mobility. Telus Mobility has its own executive: there is no evidence that it is hampered or supervised in the making of day-to-day decisions. I therefore proceed on the basis that Telus Communications Inc., being aware of the nature of the order, may not be punished for contempt committed by the subsidiary, where the conduct of that subsidiary, Telus Mobility, occurred without the fault of Telus Communications Inc. and with Telus Communications Inc. in turn doing everything reasonably to be expected and possible, given the relationship between Telus Mobility and Telus Communications Inc., to ensure the order was respected. The Union either served or brought the order to the attention of Messrs. Canfield, Entwistle, Harris and Triffo, all of whom are Directors of Telus Communications Inc. The Union has established that George Cope, President and Chief Executive Officer of Telus Mobility, is a director of Telus Communications Inc. and that Robert McFarlane appears on both the company search list of Officer and Directors of Telus Communications Inc. and on the organizational chart for Telus Mobility: both of these individuals were aware of the order. The Union has also produced an internal memo of 12 April 2002, going to all Telus and Telus Mobility employees. The reference to Telus refers to Telus Communications Inc., taking this abbreviation as common knowledge from the form of telephone bill issued to subscribers in British Columbia. That memo went to all employees in British Columbia and Alberta. The memo indicates that Telus Mobility was aware not only of the order, the effect of the order and the nature of the default, but also that the Union had stated that it would file charges of contempt. The memo goes on to refer to negotiations with the Union (although, despite an ongoing and somewhat acrimonious exchange of correspondence, negotiations had been abandoned by about 25 March 2002), to a pending judicial review of the order (which was decided against Telus Mobility) and to an intention to obtain a stay (which was never applied for). Finally, there is a paragraph in the memo indicating that Telus Mobility has been actively implementing the order. Telus Communications Inc., through its personnel, would be aware of all of this. However, such awareness does not necessarily mean contempt on the part of Telus Communications Inc.